that by wickedness and impenitence, true religion and worship were
destroyed, the Church laid waste, and kingdoms and countries visited with
the plague, war, and famine. And all this exactly came to pass even as
they said. Of this complexion is that declaration of the Prophet, where he
denounces to the Jews, "that because the vineyard of the Lord did not
bring forth grapes, but wild grapes, the Lord had decreed to lay it
waste." Isaiah 5:4, 6. Whence it appears, that impiety is the cause, why
God takes away his Word from us. And does not the Lord speak to the same
effect, in the words recorded by St. John? "Walk while ye have the light,
lest darkness come upon you." John 12:35. But what is it to walk in the
light, except it be to imitate Christ in his life, and to have the same
mind which was in him? And what does the Lord intimate by the "darkness
coming upon us," but the loss of the Gospel, and of the purity of the
Christian doctrine? All this may abundantly convince us, that without
repentance and holiness of life, no soul can be illuminated with the
saving light of the Gospel. For the Holy Ghost, who is the true
enlightener of hearts, flees from the ungodly, and chooses holy souls
only, to make them friends of God. And if the beginning of wisdom is the
fear of God (Ps. 111:10), who can doubt that impiety and carnal security
are the beginning of folly, ignorance, and blindness?

5. The true knowledge of Christ, and profession of his doctrine, consist
not in words only, but in deeds and a holy life, as St. Paul says: "They
profess that they know God; but in works they deny him, being abominable,
and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate." Titus 1:16. And
again; "They have a form of godliness, but deny the power thereof." 2 Tim.
3:5. By this we are taught, that Christ and his Gospel are denied by a
wicked life, as well as by words; and that he has not the true knowledge
of Christ, who puts it not into practice. A man who never tasted in his
heart the humility, meekness, patience, and love of Christ, cannot know
Christ himself; and, consequently, in the time of trouble, cannot freely
confess him. Whoever confesses the doctrine of Christ, and rejects him in
his life, confesses him only in part; and whoever preaches the doctrine of
Christ without his life, preaches Christ only in part. The world abounds
with books of controversy, written in defence of the _doctrine_, but very
few living books are extant concerning a Christian _life_. Now what is
doctrine without life, but a tree without fruit? Or how should he follow
the doctrine of Christ, who refuses to follow him in his life? For the sum
and substance of the doctrine of Jesus Christ is "charity, out of a pure
heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned." 1 Tim. 1:5. But
we live in an age, wherein there is so vast a number of disputants and
reasoners in matters of doctrine, that one would think they had nothing
more at heart than the promotion of religion and piety: whereas, upon a
closer search, they are found to be inwardly full of malice and pride,
envy and avarice. For this reason the apostle hath joined together _faith_
and _love_, when he commands us to "hold fast the form of sound words." 2
Tim. 1:13. _Life_ and _doctrine_, as he intends to show, must go hand in
hand together, and never be put asunder in the great work of salvation.

6. Though we do not in the slightest degree affirm, that by our own
efforts and piety, eternal life is obtained (for "we are kept by the power
of God through faith unto salvation," 1 Pet. 1:5): yet it is certain, that
by an ungodly life, the Spirit of God, with all his gifts, is banished;
amongst which gifts, faith, knowledge, understanding, and wisdom, are not
the least. Therefore it follows again, that without a holy life, purity of
doctrine cannot be preserved; and that the wicked who will not follow
Christ in his life, cannot be enlightened with the true light of the
Gospel. On the contrary, those that walk in the light, that is, who
persevere in the blessed footsteps of Christ, are illuminated by the true
light (John 1:9), which is Christ, and are hereby preserved from the
danger of delusions and errors. To this effect, that holy and enlightened
writer, Tauler, has said: "As soon as a man dedicates and yields himself
up to God, and denies his own will and flesh, then immediately the good
Spirit of God begins to illuminate him, and to endue him with solid and
sound knowledge; because this man truly keeps in his heart the true
spiritual sabbath, and rests from all sinful lusts, and from his own will
and works." This sentence is to be understood of the state after
conversion, and of daily illumination and growth in divine gifts and
graces.

7. Not without cause, then, doth the Lord say, "I am the way, and the
truth, and the life." John 14:6. He calls himself the way, as showing the
way unto us. And how did he show it? Truly, not in his doctrine only, but
also in his most holy life. This life of our blessed Redeemer consisted in
a true and unfeigned devotedness to God, leading us in the way to truth
and to life, as the substance of our whole religion, and the summary of
all the commandments of God. This book of life contains in it many great
and arduous lessons, to learn which were sufficient to take up our whole
time. Here is inculcated the exercise of true repentance, and of that
living practical faith which attends it; here the practice of love, hope,
meekness, patience, and humility, are to be studied; here the duty of
prayer, and of the fear of God, is explained: all which taken together,
make up the whole life of Christ, set us as a pattern to follow. This is
that "strait gate," and that "narrow way," which few can find. Matt. 7:14.
This is the book of life, which but few read, though all things are
comprised in it which a Christian ought to know and to practise; so that
we shall need no other book in order to our eternal salvation. Here is the
reason why also the Holy Scripture is contained in a few books, that it
might appear that Christianity does not consist in a multitude of volumes,
but in a living faith, and in a serious imitation of Christ. For the wise
man says: "Of making many books there is no end; and much study is a
weariness of the flesh." Wherefore, let us hear the conclusion of the
whole matter: "Fear God, and keep his commandments." Eccles. 12:12, 13.

8. We are told in the parable, that the devil, when men are asleep, cometh
and soweth tares among the wheat, and goeth his way. Matt. 13:25. This
teaches us, that when men lay aside the works of repentance, and indulge
themselves in the sleep of sin, of carnal security, of love of the world,
and of temporal care and concerns; then the devil gradually scatters his
seed of false doctrine in the field of pride (Gen. 3:5): whence arise
various sects, schisms, and heresies. For by the sin of pride both angels
and men lost the true light with which they were at first endued. Pride is
the original source of all delusions and errors, which have been most
unhappily brought into the world. If Satan, and Adam, the first man, had
continued in a state of humility, as did Christ when he conversed among
men, then never had any error or temptation invaded this world. But now
there is no other means for our recovery left, except that which is taught
by St. Paul: "Awake, thou that sleepest, and Christ shall give thee light"
(Eph. 5:14): convincing us thereby, that no man can be divinely
enlightened, who has not shaken off his sinful lethargy; that is, his
carnal security, profaneness, and impiety. The same is attested by St.
Peter: "Repent, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost" (Acts
2:38); and by the Lord himself, in that saying: "The world cannot receive
the Spirit of truth, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him." John
14:17. And what is the _world_, but a life passed without God?

9. Again, when the Lord says: "By their fruits ye shall know them" (Matt.
7:20); does he not signify the fruits of a good and holy life, as the
proper marks whereby true and false Christians may be discerned? A naked,
empty profession of the Christian faith, will be no safe foundation upon
which to rely. Any false Christian may cover himself with the _sheep's
clothing_ of a verbal profession of the Christian faith; when inwardly and
in his heart he is anything but a true Christian. However, be the lives of
the professors of Christianity ever so vain and wicked, it does not follow
hence, that the whole doctrine is also false and corrupted, as some would
insinuate, vainly condemning our doctrine on account of the wickedness of
some of its professed adherents. If this were true, the doctrine of Christ
and of his apostles would not escape the charge of error and falsehood;
because even in their days many impious characters intruded into the
church, and made a fair profession of the Christian faith. A profane life
is no sufficient proof of false doctrine in general, though it may give us
an insight into the individual himself, whether he be a true or a false
Christian. Truly, he cannot believe aright, who leads a life opposed to
the nature and properties of a divine faith. Such a man is no more a
believer, or a Christian, than a dead body is a man. As many, therefore,
as are of the number of such corrupt and unfruitful trees, are fit for
nothing but to be hewn down and cast into the fire. Matt. 7:19.

10. In order to understand this the better, we ought to inquire into the
nature of a sound and saving faith, and the peculiar properties that
attend it. And in the first place, a true, saving faith, works by love.
Gal. 5:6. By faith man is made "a new creature" (Gal. 6:15); he is thereby
born again, and united with God. By faith, "Christ dwells" and operates
"in his heart." Eph. 3:17. By faith the whole kingdom of God is
established in the soul, and the divine Spirit "purifies and enlightens
the heart." Acts 15:9. And truly, the Scripture copiously sets forth these
and similar properties that accompany true faith. Thus the apostle says:
"He that is joined unto the Lord (by faith) is one spirit." 1 Cor. 6:17.
And what is it to be one spirit with Christ, but to have the same mind,
the same heart and will, which are in him? And this oneness of spirit must
needs suppose that new, holy, and heavenly life of Christ which is to be
raised within us. To the same purpose it is said: "If any man be in
Christ, he is a new creature" (2 Cor. 5:17); where _to be in Christ_, is
not only to believe in him, but also to live in him. Again, "I will
betroth thee unto me forever; I will even betroth thee to me in
faithfulness." Hos. 2:19, 20. This sentence can signify no less, than that
a man by faith is wholly and spiritually united to Christ: so that where
faith is, there Christ is; where Christ is, there a holy life abides in
man; where the life of Christ is, there also is his love; and where love
is, there is God himself, who "is love" (1 John 4:8), and there is also
the Holy Ghost. And in this divine order all these heavenly transactions
combine; even as the head is one with the members, and as the cause is
linked with the effect. And this connection of faith and life, St. Peter
admirably enforces, when he bids us to "give all diligence to add to
faith, virtue; and to virtue, knowledge; and to knowledge, temperance; and
to temperance, patience; and to patience, godliness; and to godliness,
brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness, charity." "For if these
things," says he, "be in you and abound, they make you that ye shall
neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ. But he that lacketh these things is blind, and cannot see afar
off, and hath forgotten that he was purged from his old sins." 2 Pet.
1:5-9. Here the apostle evidently declares, that in whomsoever this union
of faith and of life is not to be found, he is destitute of all saving
knowledge of Christ, and walks in darkness. For it is the property of true
faith to change a man wholly, to renew, and to quicken him in Christ; so
that henceforth man may live and dwell in Christ, and Christ again may
live and dwell in man.




Chapter XL.


                  Sundry Rules For Leading A Holy Life.


    _Exercise thyself unto godliness. For godliness is profitable unto
    all things, having promise of the life that now is, and of that
    which is to come._--1 TIM. 4:7, 8.


In this apostolical sentence is contained a brief description of a
Christian's life, and of the main study about which he is employed,
namely, the study of godliness, or of Christian piety, which comprehends
in it the whole train of Christian virtues. The apostle makes use of two
motives to recommend this heavenly study, and the constant practice of it.
_First_, says he, "Godliness is profitable unto all things." Godliness is
of most admirable service, as soon as our words and actions are influenced
by it. It renders the whole life acceptable to God, and useful to our
neighbor. The _second_ motive is, because godliness is accompanied with a
gracious reward both in this life, as appears from the examples of Joseph,
of Daniel, and of others, as well as in that which is to come; where we
shall reap without ceasing, provided we do not faint while we dwell here.
Gal. 6:9. For our better encouragement in the practice of piety, let us
endeavor to keep in remembrance the following rules and considerations.

I. If thou even canst not live up to that degree of holiness which the
word of God requires, and which thou thyself desirest, yet thou must never
cease _ardently_ to _wish_ for it; for such holy breathings are always
acceptable to God. God does not so much regard the outward action of a
man, as the heart whence the action proceeds. But after all, never neglect
to crucify thy flesh, and never permit it to rule over thee.

II. In all that thou thinkest and doest, be careful to preserve the
_purity of thy heart_. Set a watch over it, lest thou be defiled with
proud thoughts, words, or actions; with wrath, or other such works of the
flesh, and of the devil. Sin opens the door to the devil, and shuts the
heart against God.

III. Study continually to maintain the Christian liberty of thy soul, and
do not suffer thyself to be enslaved, or brought into bondage, by any
inordinate love of the creature, or of the things of this world, whose
lord and master thou oughtest to be. Consider the value of thy soul, which
certainly is of a more noble nature than this present perishing world. Why
shouldest thou degrade it so far, as to subject it to the frail, base, and
frivolous things of this life?

IV. Beware of the care and _sorrow of this world_, because it worketh
death. 2 Cor. 7:10. As _worldly_ sorrow begetteth death, so _godly_ sorrow
begetteth life, and lays up an eternal treasure! Worldly sorrow springs
from avarice and envy; from excessive care; from unbelief and impatience;
and other temporal sources. Godly sorrow proceeds from a knowledge of thy
sins, and those eternal punishments which follow them. This sorrow
produces many salutary effects in a penitent soul, and "worketh repentance
to salvation, not to be repented of;" being attended with spiritual joy,
and solid peace or tranquillity of mind. No loss of a temporal kind ought
to afflict thee so much as the remembrance of thy sins, by which thou hast
offended the infinite goodness of God.

V. If thou canst not bear thy cross with joy and cheerfulness, yet take it
at least with _patience_ and _humility_, and acquiesce calmly in the
divine will and providence. For, truly, the will of God is always good;
nor does it intend anything but thy benefit and salvation. Whatsoever,
therefore, God shall be pleased to appoint thee in his wisdom, do thou
gratefully accept it, and be either joyful or sorrowful, poor or rich,
high or low, vile or excellent, as He orders thy lot. Let this saying
always be in thy mind: "Thus it seemeth good unto God, and so it must
needs be expedient and useful for me also. His will, not mine, be done."
Let not that, therefore, which pleases God, displease thee; but rather
rejoice that all things are ordered according to His pleasure and thy
salvation. Remember that "the Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy
in all his works." Ps. 145:17. Hence it is but just that the will of God
should be done, because it is always good and profitable; and that thy own
will should be subdued and unaccomplished, because it is always evil and
hurtful.

VI. Whenever the Lord visits thy soul with heavenly joy, accept the same
_with gratitude and humility_. But when he is pleased to withdraw the
comfortable light of his presence, then consider that the mortification of
the flesh must needs be of greater profit to thee than exalted joy in the
spirit. Through overmuch spiritual joy, many fall into spiritual pride.
But whatever causes mortification and sorrow, is far more useful in
subduing the flesh, than that which is delightful and pleasing to nature.
The Lord best knows whom to lead in a pleasant and agreeable path, and who
are to be brought through an unpleasant, stony, and difficult way. Always
esteem it best to arrive at thy journey's end by that way which divine
Wisdom has chosen for thee, however different it may be from thine own
choice, or from the devices of thine own heart. Remember, that "sorrow is
better than laughter;" and that "by the sadness of the countenance the
heart is made better." And if thou wilt be wise, trust to the experience
of the wise man, who tells thee furthermore, that "the heart of the wise
is in the house of mourning; but the heart of fools is in the house of
mirth." Eccl. 7:3, 4.

VII. Make an offering to God _of all that thou hast, and undertakest_. If
thou canst not bring offerings of a high and exalted devotion, of prayer,
of thanksgiving, and of other similar acts of religion, offer at least
what thou hast, with a good will, and a fervent desire. _Wish_, at least,
that it may prove acceptable unto the Lord; for to have such a desire, or
to be willing to have it, is no contemptible offering, but is very
agreeable to the kindness of God. In what measure thou _desirest_ to offer
up thy devotion, thy prayer, and praise; in that measure God accepts the
same. He requires no more at thy hands than he himself works in thee by
his grace: nor canst thou return him more than he has first conferred on
thee. In the meantime, entreat the Lord Jesus, that he would graciously
please to supply what is defective in thee, by his own more perfect
oblation and sacrifice: because he, and he only, is the perfection of our
imperfect worship and service. Say, therefore, in faith: "O my God, and my
Father, I beseech thee, let my devotion, my prayer, and thanksgiving,
together with all the acts of my faith and worship, be graciously accepted
by thee in thy beloved Son, Jesus Christ. Esteem them, not according to
what they are in themselves, but according to what they are made by the
merit of the all-sufficient sacrifice offered up by thy Son. O look upon
that, and upon all that he has wrought for me in the flesh; and as his
most perfect works must needs be pleasing to thee, so let mine also be
acceptable to thee for his sake. He, O my God, shall abundantly make up
whatsoever is defective in me." By this means, our devotion, our prayer,
and thanksgiving, how imperfect, weak, and obscure soever they may be in
themselves, acquire a certain lustre, worth, and dignity derived from the
merit of Christ, whereby our works are rendered acceptable to the Lord. As
a naked and unclean infant is offensive to every one that sees it, but
becomes sweet and lovely when it is thoroughly cleansed, and covered with
fine linen: in like manner, all the works which thou doest in thy natural
state, are polluted with sin, and of no account before God; but no sooner
art thou covered with the perfection of Christ (Isa. 61:10), than thy
works are acceptable to God. As fruit, which is not valuable in itself,
surprises the spectator into a love of it, when served up in vessels of
precious gold: so our prayers and acts of devotion, though of no account
in themselves, are exalted in Jesus Christ, in whom, as _in the beloved,
we are made accepted_ with God. Eph. 1:6.

VIII. If thy sins and manifold frailties (as they should do), make thee
sad, yet _let them not lead thee to despair_. If they be many in number,
remember that there is yet more mercy with Christ, and "plenteous
redemption with him." Ps. 130:7. If thy imperfections be ever so great,
remember that Christ's merits are yet greater, and say with the royal
penitent: "Have mercy upon me, O Lord, according to the multitude of thy
tender mercies!" Ps. 51:1. And when, by the grace of God, thou truly
repentest, and beholdest Christ Jesus, that great sacrifice for sin, then
God himself repents of the evil which was to be inflicted upon thee; and
absolution and remission of sin instantly follow so good and salutary a
sorrow. Ezek. 18:23; 33:11. As the leper, upon his application to Christ,
was immediately delivered from his evil, so is also the penitent sinner.
No sooner did he say, "Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean;" than
Christ freely replied: "I will; be thou clean." Matt. 8:2, 3. So also the
merciful God, inwardly and in the spirit, makes thee clean, comforts thee,
and says: "Be of good cheer; thy sins are forgiven thee." Matt. 9:2. This
wonderful mercy of the Lord in cleansing and absolving thee of thy sins,
as it is forcibly represented by the example of that leper, so it ought by
no means to give thee an occasion to sin the more; but to love God the
more, and to say, "Bless the Lord, O my soul; and all that is within me
bless his holy name." Ps. 103:1.

IX. Let not injuries, reproaches, and revilings, provoke thee at any time
to wrath, indignation, or revenge; but rather _take them as so many trials
of_ thy heart, and of the inward state of thy soul. Hereby God designs to
_prove_ thee, that it may appear what is hidden within thee, and whether
meekness and humility, or wrath and pride, sway thy mind. For that which
lies concealed in a man, is stirred up and made manifest by reproaches and
provocations. If, therefore, thy heart be endued with meekness and
lowliness, thou wilt easily bear contempt and injuries; nay, thou wilt
accept them as so many paternal chastisements designed for the good of thy
soul. Moreover, thou must consider, that contempt and reproaches are part
of the chastisements which the Almighty sends, and thou shouldst patiently
bear whatever the Lord shall be pleased to allot to thee. "Let us go
forth," says the apostle, "unto him, bearing his reproach." Heb. 13:13.
Behold with what lowliness of heart did he undergo the affronts of a
profane world! And should not we submit to the same with meekness, and
with an unshaken evenness of mind? Say not then, "Should I suffer these
things from so contemptible a fellow as this?" but rather submit, in
consideration of that patient and meek spirit which was in Christ, and
displayed itself in his whole life and conduct. Lastly, consider the
kindness of God towards those that suffer for his sake. So faithful is he,
and so kind to those that bear any disgrace on his account, that he
confers the greater marks of honor and favor upon them. Thus David, when
Shimei vented his malice upon him, took it for a pledge that God would
bestow a token of great honor upon him; and this accordingly came to pass.
"It may be," says he, "that the Lord will look on mine affliction, and
that the Lord will requite me good for his cursing this day," and turn his
curse into a blessing. 2 Sam. 16:12. Be not, therefore, at all disturbed
at the evil report that wicked men may raise against thee; but rejoice
rather, since the Spirit of glory rests on those that are reproached for
the name of Christ. 1 Peter 4:14.

X. Study to overcome and to pacify thine enemies, by bestowing upon them
tokens of _love and kindness_. No man will ever be reconciled by wrath, or
revenge, or returning evil for evil, for victory consists in virtue, not
in vice. And as one devil does not drive out another, so it cannot be
expected that one evil should be subdued by another; or that enmity
against thee should be extinguished by affronts and provocations offered
by thee. A man that is full of sores and bruises, is not likely to be
healed by the addition of more blows; and if he be so mad as to beat and
to cut himself, he is to be pitied, and to be treated with the greater
kindness and lenity. In like manner, if a man be full of _spiritual_
distemper, and of hatred, he is to be handled with the more love and
gentleness; if, perhaps, by such lenient means as these, he may be
softened into a better temper. Consider the method which God himself uses
for overcoming our natural obstinacy. Does he not conquer our malice with
his goodness, and our wrath with his love? And does he not invite us to
repentance by many endearing marks of love and benignity? Rom. 2:4. This
method is prescribed by St. Paul: "Be not," says he, "overcome of evil,
but overcome evil with good." Rom. 12:21. This is victory indeed.

XI. When thou observest that God has adorned thy neighbor with gifts above
thee, take heed _not to envy him_ on that account; but rather rejoice and
give thanks to God for the same. Consider, that since all true believers
make up together but _one_ body, it must needs follow, that the beauty of
every member is communicated to the whole body, and to every member
thereof. On the other hand, when thou perceivest the misery of thy
neighbor, lament over it as if it were thine own; considering that the
condition of all men is equally subject to evil, and that misery and
affliction are the lot of mankind. Christ hath also set thee here an
example. And, truly, whoever does not commiserate and sympathize with the
misery of his neighbor, let him pretend to be what he may, he is no living
member of the body of Christ. For did not Christ look upon our misery as
his own, and by compassionating our deplorable state, deliver us from all
our miseries? This mutual love and sympathy, are inculcated by St. Paul:
"Bear ye one another's burdens," says he, "and so fulfil the law of
Christ." Gal. 6:2.

XII. As for _love_ and _hatred_ in relation to thy neighbor, make the
following distinction. It is but fit that thou shouldest hate his vices
and crimes as the very works of the devil; but then, beware of hating the
_person_ whilst thou abhorrest his _sin_. On the contrary, it is thy duty
to bewail the case of thy neighbor, who, being carried away by so many
irregular passions, enjoys no solid rest in his soul. Offer up his cause
to God, and pray for him, as Christ did for his enemies, when he was
nailed to the cross. Luke 23:34. Do not, therefore, hate any _man_, but
hate his _vices_ only; for whosoever hates a man, and seeks his ruin, can
in no wise be pleasing to God; since it is the very nature of God to be
kind, and to desire that "all men should be saved, and come unto the
knowledge of the truth." 1 Tim. 2:4. This was also the end for which
Christ took our flesh upon him. He came into the world, "not to destroy
men's lives, but to save them." Luke 9:56.

XIII. Consider all men as being frail and imperfect, but none as more
frail and imperfect than thyself; for before God, all men stand equally
guilty, and there is no difference. We have all sinned, and have thereby
been deprived of the image of God, and of all the glory which attended it.
Rom. 3:23. How great a sinner, therefore, thy neighbor may be, never
fondly persuade thyself, that thou art better before God. Remember this
warning of the apostle: "Let him that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest
he fall." 1 Cor. 10:12. He that makes himself the lowest of all men, is in
the fairest way of being preserved, by the grace of God, unto salvation.
And certain it is, that thou standest no less in need of the grace and
mercy of God, than the greatest of sinners. Where there is a great measure
of humility, there is also a great measure of grace. Wherefore St. Paul
accounted himself the "chief of sinners" (1 Tim. 1:15); and it was in this
order he obtained mercy, and had so much long-suffering bestowed upon him.
And in another place he declares that he will glory in nothing but in "his
infirmities, that the power of Christ might rest upon him." 2 Cor. 12:9.

XIV. True illumination is always accompanied with a contempt of the things
of the world. As the children of the world have their inheritance here
upon earth; so the children of God have theirs laid up above in heaven.
The treasures which the children of this world have chiefly at heart, are
temporal honors, perishing riches, earthly splendor and glory. But the
treasures of the children of God are poverty and contempt, persecution and
reproach, the cross and death, trouble and sorrow. Thus did Moses prefer
"the reproach of Christ before the treasures in Egypt;" and the affliction
of the people of God, before the pleasures of sin. Heb. 11:25, 26.

XV. Remember, that by the name of a Christian written in heaven, is
intimated that solid, practical _knowledge of Christ_ which is grounded
_in faith_, and by which we are transplanted into Christ. From this
knowledge flow all the living virtues which the Lord will praise in the
great day of retribution. Matt. 25:34, etc. He will then also bring to
light all those treasures which we have laid up in heaven (1 Tim. 6:19),
together with all such works as have been wrought in God. John 3:21. Never
has a saint lived upon earth, but he has been particularly eminent in one
virtue or other; and this virtue shall never be forgotten. Ps. 112:6.
Whether it be faith, love, mercy, patience, or any other virtue in the
practice of which he has been so conspicuous, it shall make up that
eternal name which is written in heaven. Rev. 2:17; 3:12. This will be the
note and character of the saints, and their eternal memorial before God.
But of this, more shall be said in Book II.




Chapter XLI.


The Whole Of Christianity Consists In The Restoration Of The Image Of God
            In Man, And The Destruction Of The Image Of Satan.


    _But we all, with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of
    the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory,
    even as by the Spirit of the Lord._--2 COR. 3:18.


In the _true knowledge_ of Christ, wherein is comprehended that of his
Person, offices, benefits, and heavenly and eternal gifts, consists _life
everlasting_. John 17:3. This knowledge is kindled in our hearts by the
Divine Spirit, and is a new light shining forth with increasing
brightness, and passing on from glory to glory. It is like a metallic
body, which, by constant polishing, becomes every day more brilliant; or
like a tender infant, which, by a daily supply of food, grows up in vigor
and strength. No sooner is the righteousness of Christ, through faith,
conferred upon a returning sinner, than he is also really born again, and
the image of God is daily renewed within him. His spiritual growth, or the
renovation of his mind, goes on, however, in a successive manner, from one
degree to another, for he has not yet become a "perfect man in Christ."
Eph. 4:13. He is a child for some time; but is continually nourished by
the Divine Spirit, and daily brought to a greater conformity with the Lord
Jesus Christ.

2. For the whole life of a Christian upon earth, is properly nothing else
than a continual _renewing_ of the image of God in his soul: so that he
may constantly live in the new birth, and daily mortify that which is old
and corrupt, till the body of sin be eventually destroyed. Rom. 6:4. This
life must be begun in this world, that so it may be perfected in that
which is to come. Whereas, in whomsoever the renewal of this divine life
shall not be begun before his departure from this world, in him it never
shall be accomplished. Wherefore I have thought it might be well briefly
to repeat what is here meant by the _image of God_, which is to be
revived; and what by the _image of the devil_, which is to be obliterated
and destroyed in man's soul: for in the right knowledge of these two, the
substance of our whole religion consists. It is the main point upon which
all turns, and from which many other articles (as that of Original Sin,
free-will, repentance, conversion, faith, justification, prayer, the new
birth, sanctification, and lastly, obedience, and the whole practice of a
religious life), borrow no small light. Of this, the following remarks
will give an account.

3. The soul of man is an immortal spirit, endowed of God with excellent
faculties; as the understanding, will, memory, and other powers and
affections.

4. See that thou turn all these towards thy God, in order to behold him
therein as in a mirror; and, by beholding him, to have his image gradually
formed in thy soul. In this sense the apostle speaks of "the glory of the
Lord," which we behold "with an open face," without vail and shadows. 2.
Cor. 3:18.

5. As God is a truly good and holy Being; so also were the substance of
the soul, and its true nature and essence, originally good and holy. And
as in God there is nothing of evil; even so was the soul of man, in the
beginning, free from all manner of evil. As in God there is nothing but
what is right; so in the soul there was nothing at first but what was
right also. For He is the rock, whose "work is perfect;" even "a God of
truth, and without iniquity, just and right is he." Deut. 32:4; Ps. 92:15.
As God is wise, so was also the human soul full of divine and spiritual
knowledge, of heavenly and eternal wisdom. And as the divine wisdom
ordered all things in number, weight, and measure, and knew the powers of
all creatures, as well in heaven as in earth: so also was the mind of man
possessed of the same light and knowledge.

6. And as it was with the understanding, so it was with the will: for as
the one was the image and reflection of the divine understanding, so was
the other of the divine will, in everything. It was holy as the pattern
was holy, and conformed to the will of God. Hence, as God himself is, so
was the human soul; righteous, loving, merciful, long-suffering, patient,
meek, gentle, true, and pure. Exod. 34:6; Ps. 103:8; Joel 2:13. Yea, all
the passions or affections, all the appetites, and motions of the heart,
being made most perfectly conformable to the motions and affections of the
divine mind, partook of this conformity of the will of man to that of God.
As, therefore, God is LOVE, so all the affections and motions of man, in
his first state, breathed nothing but pure love. As God, the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, are ONE in an unspeakable and eternal bond of
love; so all the affections and desires of man, burned with a most perfect
and ardent love, and he cleaved unto God fully with all the powers and
faculties which he had; "with all his heart, and with all his soul, and
with all his might" (Deut. 6:5); so that man verily loved God more than
himself, and preferred God and His honor, to himself and his own.

7. But as the image of God shone forth in the _soul_, so the image of the
soul again shone forth in and from the _body_. This, therefore, was holy,
chaste, and pure throughout, not subject to any unclean motion or lust. It
was undefiled and without blemish. It was in every respect, beautiful,
well proportioned, and graceful; of vigorous health, and possessed of a
constitution even out of the very danger of sickness. It was such as death
itself had no power over, and it was perfectly free from pain,
listlessness, passion, grief, and old age, now the common attendants and
warnings of man's mortality. In a word, the whole man, both in soul and
body, was pure, holy, righteous, and every way acceptable to God. For, in
order that man might be the image of God, it was necessary that his body
should be holy, and conformable to God, as well as his soul. Accordingly,
St. Paul both exhorts and prays, that the _body_, together with the
_spirit_ and _soul_, be _sanctified wholly_; and be preserved holy and
blameless unto the coming of our Lord. 1 Thess. 5:23. For since man is
made up of soul and body, and exercises both bodily and spiritual
functions, there was a necessity that the instrument through which the
soul was to act, should be pliable and obedient, adapted to the nature of
the soul, and holy as the soul was holy; to the end that the holy and
righteous soul, might finish her work through the body without any
obstacle or resistance. As, therefore, the soul burned with the pure love
of God: so did all the powers of the body manifest and exert themselves in
the love of God and man. As the soul was altogether merciful; so also the
body was, with its whole might, and all its faculties, impelled to
tenderness and compassion. As chastity shone forth from the soul, which
was altogether pure; so the whole body, in like manner, with all the
inward and outward senses and powers thereof, visibly set forth the most
perfect purity and chastity. To conclude, the virtues no less gloriously
shone in the body, than in the soul itself; so that the body was the holy
instrument of the soul, in everything suited to it, and worked together
with it. And hence man in the state of innocency, was able to love God
_with all his heart_, _with all his soul_, _with all his strength_, _and
with all his mind, and to love his neighbor as himself_: which is the very
substance both of the old and new law given to man. Deut. 6:5; Matt.
22:37, 39; Luke 10:27. Hence, as often as God calls for the heart of man,
we are to understand the _whole man_, both as to body and soul, and the
powers, faculties, and operations of both. In this sense, the word
"_heart_" is frequently taken in Scripture; so that under it are
comprehended all the powers of the soul, as the understanding, will, and
memory, together with all the desires and affections attendant on them. So
when God demands a man's _soul_, he, under that name, requires not a part,
but the whole of a man. He must, in all his powers, be conformed to God,
and renewed in Christ Jesus: and thus man, having put off the old nature,
and being renewed in the spirit of his mind, must also _walk_ in newness
of life, and in the spirit by which he was begotten again. Gal. 5:16; Eph.
4:23.

8. Moreover, there was a _perfect joy in God_, which accompanied this
perfection of holiness, righteousness, and divine love, in man. By this,
all the faculties and springs, both of soul and body, were most powerfully
affected: for wherever divine holiness resides, there also divine joy must
be present. These two are knit together with an everlasting bond, and make
up the very image of God. Yet, as in this life, the divine righteousness
and holiness are but imperfect in us, so we but taste, while here, only
the first fruits of that joy which shall be fully revealed hereafter.
However, as the righteousness of Christ is verily _begun_ in sincere
believers, so it follows that they also enjoy a _real_ beginning and
foretaste of divine joy and comfort; as those Christians can abundantly
attest, that have learned religion by experience. John 16:22; 2 Cor. 1:5;
Phil. 4:4. Whatever progress, therefore, any one makes in the love of God,
be it more or less, so much of divine joy does he also perceive in his
soul. And this holy and divine love, as it shall in the next life attain
its full perfection, so in that day the Christian's _joy_ (arising from
love) shall also be _full_, as the Lord himself declares. John 15:11;
16:22. For divine love is the only true life, and the only true joy: but
where this love of God is wanting, there is neither joy nor life; but
death itself, and the everlasting portion of wicked men and devils. Whence
has a father joy? Is it not from the love of his children? Whence has a
bridegroom joy? Is it not from the love of the bride? Isaiah 61:10; 62:5.
But infinitely sweeter must that joy be, which is derived from the love of
our Creator! He not only embraces us as a father does his children, but he
rejoices over us as over his bride; nay, most tenderly kisses us "with the
kisses of his mouth" (Cant. 1:2.), (that is, in Christ, who is his mouth
and word), and coming to us, through Christ with the Holy Ghost, makes his
_abode_ with us. John 14:23. Take heed, however, concerning this image of
God, which consists in a conformity with God, that you do not therefore
think, as if man were made _equal_ with God in holiness. Not by any means.
For God is infinite as to his essence, virtues, and properties; he is
incomprehensible, and without bounds; so that nothing in the world can be
compared with him. Man therefore, even in his first state, could not
properly be said to bear God in him; being designed only to bear his
_image_, as it has been already explained in Chapter I. of this Book.

9. That which has now been stated concerning the image of God, is plain,
true, and beyond all doubt. It cannot be denied, that God created man, to
be a bright mirror of himself: so that if man had been desirous to know
the nature of God, he might, by looking into himself, have beheld God
there, as in a glass, and clearly perceived the image of the Deity within
his own breast.

10. This image was the life and blessedness of man; but the devil, looking
with envious eyes upon this image of God in man, exerted all his art and
cunning to efface it, by raising in man a spirit of disobedience and
enmity against God. Gen. 3:1, etc. This he accordingly effected with a
subtility and haste, that never were since seen. He was not ignorant, that
if man had continued in that state, _he_ would have been the master: but
that if he could be induced to fall from it, that the devil would thereby
become the lord (or rather the tyrant) of fallen man. When, therefore,
with all the powers of his cunning and malice, he could devise nothing
more likely to accomplish his design than that by which he himself lost
his first state or principality, he began, in a seductive manner, to
insinuate into the imagination of the woman, no less than an affectation
of the Divine Majesty. What can appear more divine, or what is there more
noble to be wished for, than to "be as God"? Gen. 3:5. By this cunningly
contrived method, man being therefore circumvented, he lost the divine
image at once; and the image of Satan, consisting in an affectation of the
Divine Majesty, was impressed upon him.

11. This aspiring thought, by which man threw off all his dependence on
God, being thus begotten in the mind; and this haughty arrogance having
once seized the imagination, there followed immediately apostasy from God,
disobedience, and transgression of the commandment concerning the
forbidden tree. Hereupon the image of God was extinguished, the Holy
Spirit departed from man, and the image of Satan was imprinted instead of
that which was effaced. Hence now there are so many men, so many slaves of
the devil. The devil having thus gained his object in subjecting man to
his dominion, most cruelly tyrannized over him; just as a giant may be
supposed to do over a little infant. Hence the understanding in man is
darkened and blinded; the will is, by a complete disobedience, turned from
God; and all the springs and powers of the heart are stirred up against
God in utter malice. In a word, the whole image of God lieth now slain in
man, and the whole race of mankind, being swayed by the satanical nature,
have a seed sown in them full of the deepest malignity. Hence men became
the offspring of Satan, and his living likeness, being poisoned with all
manner of sin and enmity against God. Thus died man! Thus died he the
death everlasting! For as the image of God is the life and salvation of
man, so the departure of this image is the death of man, even death
eternal, and his damnation, which is also called a death "in trespasses
and sins." Eph. 2:1; Col. 2:13.

12. They best understand this death, who, having been cast into deep
spiritual temptations, sensibly feel the devil's rage and tyranny over
them. By this he torments the soul beyond what it is in the ordinary power
of sin to effect. Now, unless the Holy Ghost shine in upon the soul under
this terrible affliction, and by darting in some ray of his light comfort
it; the devil slays the man with this death, and racks the soul with the
very anguish of hell itself. Hence all the natural force of the body
sinks, the strength fails, the heart withers and pants, and the very
marrow in the bones consumes away, so that there is no soundness left in
the body. This state is described at large, in Psalms 6 and 38. The word
of God itself, to such a one, seems dead and lifeless: he finds in it no
manner of devotion, no savor of spiritual life. This is the _spiritual_
death, into which the soul is fallen: and while the soul remains thus
spiritually dead, all human holiness, righteousness, excellency, might,
power, glory, honor, arts, and wisdom, can avail nothing. And, truly, man
would undoubtedly perish in this grievous condition, if he were not
supported by divine grace: for nothing but this is able to succor him.

13. Learn, therefore, O man, duly to look into, and rightly to consider
the abominable filthiness of _Original Sin_, as the sink of all
abomination. For by this the hereditary righteousness of God was lost, and
the hereditary unrighteousness of the devil transplanted into men. Hence
the sinner was cast away from God, and doomed to an eternal death: and
this he must certainly undergo, except he obtain forgiveness of sin for
Christ's sake through faith.

14. But to set the state of fallen man, both as to soul and body, in as
clear a light as possibly I can, I think it well to give a fuller
description thereof in this place; most earnestly entreating every one,
for the sake of God and of his own eternal salvation, to ponder again and
again, and seriously to revolve in his mind that original depravity which
has corrupted our nature. The consequence of this will be, that as a man
beholds his bodily face in a glass, and knows it, so he may also behold in
himself his own wretchedness, and original sin. This will daily influence
him to lament his own distressed condition, and to sigh after Him, who
alone is able to heal us.

15. For the whole Christian life is indeed nothing else, than a constant
wrestling with original sin, and a continual purging away of the same by
the aid of the Holy Ghost, and by true repentance. For, in proportion as
any one mortifies his natural propensity to evil, in that degree is he
renewed after the image of God, even day by day; and they who are not
inwardly mortified by the Holy Ghost, are at best no more than hypocrites,
let them make ever so great a show with an external profession of the
Christian faith. Neither can they expect to enter into the kingdom of God,
since they are not renewed into his image: for whatsoever is not dead to
itself, nor renewed into the image of God by his Spirit, is altogether
unfit for that glorious state.

16. From all this, there may evidently be inferred the absolute necessity
of the new birth, and of the daily renovation of our mind into the image
of God. This necessity will yet more fully appear, when we consider the
image of the devil according as the law describes it. For as the devil not
only does not _love_ God, but rather _hates_ him with his whole heart; so
he has infected man's soul with the same contagion, and transfused into it
malice against God; so that now man by nature neither loves, honors,
believes, calls upon, nor trusts in God; but as he is filled with enmity
against him, so he flees from him, and shuns him. As the devil is hurried
on with a blind fury, and lives without God and his will; so in like
manner, the soul of man being corrupted by him, leads a _godless_ life,
unmindful of God and of his will. This inward darkness of the mind, is
attended with a frightful destruction of the divine light and image; and
brings forth that abominable sin, in which man, left to himself, saith:
"There is no God." Ps. 14:1. And by reason of this blindness of heart, all
mankind are become an abomination before God, in all their ways.

17. But notwithstanding so dreadful a night of apostasy, there still
remains a spark of natural light in man's understanding, by which he might
come to know that there is a God (Rom. 1:20); as also, that this God must
be just, according as all the heathen philosophers teach: but as for the
spiritual life, which is after God and his righteousness, it was wholly
extinguished in man. For conscience, which is the law of God written in
every man's heart when it was first formed by him, teaches every one what
is good and right. Thus if you look, for instance, upon a person that is
unchaste, there is not one that so much wallows in the filth of the flesh,
but he now and then thinks with himself, "Surely there is a God, and this
God is most pure and undefiled; and so not like to me by any means." He
cannot but reflect further: "This holy and pure God, must abhor every sort
of pollution and uncleanness; and, therefore, if I would be acceptable to
him, I ought to live chastely, and to abstain from all impurity." But this
spark of light is soon put out by the filthy lusts of the flesh which
crowd in upon the mind; these overwhelm all good impressions, just as a
spark of fire is swallowed up by a flood of water. The lust of the flesh
is kept within the heart, and the conviction, which began to reprove it,
is soon stifled.

18. From this it plainly appears, that the spiritual life, consisting in
holy love and truth, is in the carnal or natural man utterly abolished.
And thus the wiser sort of heathens, however they might sometimes by the
light of nature maintain both the being of a God, and his providence over
human affairs, were soon carried away with the darkness of their own
hearts, and again called in question that providence which they had before
asserted: so that very little is to be made of what they say on this head.
This their books sufficiently declare. From this hereditary blindness of
heart, and this natural inbred darkness, spring unbelief and doubts. And
because all men are by nature in this degenerate state, they are an
abomination in the sight of God; since there is no faith in them, nor any
filial reliance upon the paternal goodness of God. To this spiritual life,
and to the various operations that proceed from it, the natural man is an
utter stranger; consequently he does not call upon God, but trusts to his
own wisdom, power, and strength. This is the greatest blindness and
darkness of mind possible.

19. From this blindness of heart, further arise both a contempt of God,
and a state of carnal security. As the devil does not humble himself
before God, but is hardened in pride; so has he infected the soul of man
with the same vice, and poisoned it with contempt of God, security, and
presumption. Hence he, like his father the devil (John 8:44), will not
humble himself before God; but is stout and insolent, haughty and
self-willed, and would do everything after his own will, without the least
fear of the Lord to keep him awe. As the devil relies on his own strength
and wisdom, and thereby entirely governs himself; so fallen man, being
infected with the contagion of Satan, acts in conformity with him; and
will always be his own counsellor and master. Moreover, as the devil seeks
his own honor, so does the natural man, who bears his image. He is in
pursuit of self-honor, without any regard to his Maker, whose honor he was
designed to promote. As the devil blasphemes the name of God, and is
ungrateful to his Creator; so it is with man, transformed into his image.
As the devil is unmerciful, wrathful, and revengeful, so is the soul of
man, which he has soured with the same leaven of malice. As the devil
delights to _lord_ it over men, and to please himself with vainglory, so
man, tainted with the same tyrannical ambition, haughtily lifts himself up
above others. He laughs at his neighbor, and shuns his company, as if he
were a worthless, pitiful person, and too great a sinner to be conversed
with. But, O man! thou art to consider over and over again, that in these,
and all other cases, the method of God is not to charge or accuse the
outward members of a man, but the _heart_ only. The heart is the murderer
and the liar, not the hand nor the mouth. It is the soul that is guilty;
and this is therefore everywhere arraigned in Scripture. So when God
commands men to call upon him in the time of trouble (Ps. 50:15), he gives
this command to the soul, not to the lips. And it is the very same in
every other case. Whosoever does not observe this necessary rule in
reading the Scriptures, is blind indeed. He can never have a right
apprehension of original sin, repentance, or regeneration: nay, he cannot
attain to a sound knowledge of any one article of the Christian religion.

20. We have daily before our eyes the extreme wickedness of men, their
horrid pride, savage hatred, barbarous enviousness, and other impious
qualities, with which they tear one another, after the manner of wild
beasts. Many are transported to such a degree of malice, as to be
unconcerned about their own lives, provided they can but hurt or destroy
another. Their neighbor must submit to their pleasure, or expect to have a
snare laid for his ruin. Thus, as the devil himself is a "murderer from
the beginning" (John 8:44); so he stirs up the soul of man to thirst after
the blood of others. For all these inhuman qualities of the heart, this
envy and wrath, this bitterness of mind, this rancor and malice, what are
they but the seed of the devil sown in man, and his express image engraven
upon the soul? Alas! how the devil has portrayed himself in man!

21. God had implanted in man a conjugal affection, that was pure and
honorable; that thence children might be begotten after the divine image.
Nor could there have been a love more holy and heavenly, than that by
which man, in his blessed estate, would have thus propagated the image of
God and mankind at the same time. All would have been for the glory of his
Creator, and the salvation of man. Nay, if man in the state of innocency
could have begotten a vast multitude of children, and have thus propagated
the honor and image of God; nothing, certainly, could have been more
grateful to him than this; nothing more delightful, more full of holy joy
and satisfaction. For these acts would then have proceeded from pure love
to God and to men, as so many images of the Supreme Good. As God found in
the creation of man, a holy pleasure, and delighted in him, as in his
image; so also man would, in like manner, have been sensible of a most
pure and exquisite joy in the procreation of his like, for it would have
been the propagation of God's image. But, alas! Satan has polluted this
chaste flame of conjugal love with all uncleanness. Men and women,
actuated with a blind transport of lust, begot children _in their own_,
not in God's likeness. Gen. 5:3. How is the holy bond of matrimony
trampled upon and profaned! How wholly defiled is it with spots of the
flesh, and what a multitude of vices and impurities now shelter themselves
under the sacred name of matrimony!

22. As God is just, the devil is unjust. The devil is therefore a thief, a
plunderer; and being so in himself, has instilled into man's soul the same
unjust disposition, the same ravenous nature. The devil is a false accuser
(Rev. 12:10), a fallacious reasoner (2 Cor. 11:3), and a treacherous
informer (Job 1:9, 10), as well as a scornful mocker of God and man. Job
2:3, 4, 5. He misrepresents both words and actions, and wrests them to a
wrong sense. Of this artful contrivance he gave a striking instance when
he beguiled our first parents by his craft and subtlety. Gen. 3:5-7. Thus
the soul of man, corrupted by Satan, has received from him, as by
inheritance, a perverse and lying nature. John 8:44. This poison, conveyed
into the soul, is so horrible and so manifold, as to render it altogether
impossible to declare at large the subtile contrivances, and the different
kinds of diabolical art and cunning that proceed from it. Eph. 6:11. Read
Psalm 5:9, Romans 3:13, and James 3:5, 6; and thou shalt find described
therein in the most lively terms, that world of wickedness, which by a
deceitful tongue is drawn forth from the diabolical venom that lurks
within, and that thence spreads itself through the whole man. For God does
not blame the tongue, or the hands alone, but in his law, charges the
fault upon the whole man, yea, upon the heart, as the chief cause of all
the evils committed. See the Commandments, in Exodus 20:16, 17. This ought
to be particularly observed in the whole course of a religious life.

23. And this is that image of the devil, which now, instead of the image
of God, is so deeply engraven on the soul. Hereby man is made to delight
in sinning, and in slandering another, even as the devil's name imports.
Rev. 12:10. How many, alas! are there, that reckon themselves very good
Christians, and yet will not hesitate to slander their neighbor upon any
occasion that offers; and after they have discharged their venom against
him, will applaud themselves for what they have done. Such a man will say:
"This is just what I have sought for a long while; I am now eased of a
great burden; I seem to be alive again, as I have so finely treated such a
one." Ah! poor man, thou art to be pitied! How great is thy blindness,
that thou dost not discern who it is that has transformed thee into such a
devil and slanderer; and whose image it is thou carriest about thee! Seest
thou not that this is the very nature of the devil, the unhappy seed of
Satan? Discernest thou not this to be his true temper, which he has
implanted in the soul of man, that it might there display itself, in all
sorts of vices, but more particularly in pride, covetousness, lust, and
slander; even as daily experience abundantly witnesses? Alas, is this thy
wit, and cunning, and wisdom?

24. Behold, O man! the foul, the horrible, the profound corruption of
Original Sin! O how filthy, how unsearchable it is! Consider this again
and again; and descending into thyself, learn there to know the image and
nature of Satan, which, like a gangrene, is spread through thy whole soul,
together with all the dangerous symptoms that attend it. And learn how thy
soul is hence become an abomination before God, and is laid waste in so
dreadful a manner, that no creature is able thoroughly to search out the
malignity of the heart of man. Neither art thou thyself able sufficiently
to explore it, or to explain in words, that detestable venom which is as
rottenness in thy innermost parts. Wherefore, I earnestly beseech and
entreat every one, that he ponder with himself, and seriously reflect on
those things that have been said concerning the _depravity and corruption
of man's heart_; even as if they had been inculcated a thousand and
thousand times, over and over again. For so great is this virulence, so
malignant and pestilential, as to put it beyond the power of any creature,
either angel or man, ever to root it out, or to cleanse or free our nature
from it. All the powers of men come short of so great a performance. For
how should any one be able to work out his salvation with his own natural
powers, since they all without exception are utterly depraved, and dead to
spiritual things? Man, therefore, must be forever miserable, and eternally
lost in this corruption, unless there come to his help one that is able to
succor, and to apply a healing medicine to so dreadful a disease. This
must be a lord over sin and death, able to subdue so obstinate an evil,
and by his divine virtue, to renew, transform, and purify again the
defiled nature of man. All this is a convincing proof, that
_justification_ cannot be the work of man, but is the work of God only;
and likewise that _regeneration_, or the being born again by the Spirit,
is indispensably needful to the restoring of fallen nature. For in
conformity to the inward principle of corruption, there is now a sort of
necessity that the soul should live a perverse and impious life. Man does
not now hesitate openly to transgress all the commandments of God; and
this is enmity against God. The understanding and will are now so dead,
and so much enslaved by sin, that according to their natural bent, they
are incapable of any love, fear, or reverence for God. They cannot call
upon him, honor him, praise, or worship him; they cannot put the least
trust in him, or turn themselves towards him. Many of the heathens have,
indeed, been illustrious for their good and virtuous deeds, and gained no
small credit by their morality. But it is utterly impossible for nature to
_change the heart_, to turn it to God, and to cleanse it from those sinful
affections that lurk within. This work is to be accomplished only by a
_divine_ power. For notwithstanding all this glittering show of morality
which some make, there still remains the inward root of the tree of evil,
whose fibres stick so fast in the soul, that no human power can ever
destroy them. The utmost that a man can do in so sad a case, is to prevent
the fire from breaking out into flames, so as to consume all that comes
near it; but notwithstanding this damp which is cast upon it, the evil
fire still keeps in, and secretly burns as much as ever.

25. Were not human life, and the management of civil and social affairs
under some check, the whole race of mankind would be destroyed at once,
and rooted up from off the face of the earth. But though the devil has
exercised an exceedingly great cruelty over man, yet God has not suffered
him to pluck up all the natural powers and affections from man's soul, or
to extinguish the spark of free will which remains in the soul. There
still remain the law of nature and the natural love subsisting betwixt
husband and wife, parents and children. Without this it would have been
impossible for mankind to have long subsisted upon earth. For he who obeys
the unbridled lusts and desires of his corrupt nature, must be looked upon
as the very bane of all society. He entirely ruins, as much as in him
lies, all commerce and dealings betwixt men. It is, therefore, an effect
both of God's mercy and wisdom, that he has preserved in fallen man this
little flame of natural love: the design of which is, that by the sense of
this love, we might know in some degree the excellency of that spiritual
and divine love which we have lost by the fall of man; and that from
feeling the one, we might be brought to consider the worth of the other,
and to breathe after the recovery of the same. But as to _spiritual_
matters, and such things as more immediately concern the happiness of the
soul, and the kingdom of God, nothing can be more true than that saying of
the apostle, "The natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of
God; for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because
they are spiritually discerned." 1 Cor. 2:14. That is, man in his natural
state, has not so much as one spark of spiritual and divine light; but is
wholly blind in the things that appertain to the heavenly life, and that
constitute the image of God in the new creature. Man, nevertheless, was
created for this only end, that by means of this spiritual light, he
might, with the inward eye of the soul, contemplate the gracious presence
of God, and his sincere love towards him; and, continually walking with
