the particular with disconcerting speed.

"That is your cave." The yogi bestowed on me a gaze of illumination
which I have never forgotten. "That is your sacred mountain. That
is where you will find the kingdom of God."

His simple words instantaneously banished my lifelong obsession for
the Himalayas. In a burning paddy field I awoke from the monticolous
dreams of eternal snows.

"Young sir, your divine thirst is laudable. I feel great love for
you." Ram Gopal took my hand and led me to a quaint hamlet. The
adobe houses were covered with coconut leaves and adorned with
rustic entrances.

The saint seated me on the umbrageous bamboo platform of his small
cottage. After giving me sweetened lime juice and a piece of rock
candy, he entered his patio and assumed the lotus posture. In about
four hours I opened my meditative eyes and saw that the moonlit
figure of the yogi was still motionless. As I was sternly reminding
my stomach that man does not live by bread alone, Ram Gopal approached
me.

"I see you are famished; food will be ready soon."

A fire was kindled under a clay oven on the patio; rice and DHAL
were quickly served on large banana leaves. My host courteously
refused my aid in all cooking chores. "The guest is God," a Hindu
proverb, has commanded devout observance from time immemorial. In
my later world travels, I was charmed to see that a similar respect
for visitors is manifested in rural sections of many countries.
The city dweller finds the keen edge of hospitality blunted by
superabundance of strange faces.

The marts of men seemed remotely dim as I squatted by the yogi
in the isolation of the tiny jungle village. The cottage room
was mysterious with a mellow light. Ram Gopal arranged some torn
blankets on the floor for my bed, and seated himself on a straw
mat. Overwhelmed by his spiritual magnetism, I ventured a request.

"Sir, why don't you grant me a SAMADHI?"

"Dear one, I would be glad to convey the divine contact, but it
is not my place to do so." The saint looked at me with half-closed
eyes.  "Your master will bestow that experience shortly. Your body
is not tuned just yet. As a small lamp cannot withstand excessive
electrical voltage, so your nerves are unready for the cosmic
current. If I gave you the infinite ecstasy right now, you would
burn as if every cell were on fire.

"You are asking illumination from me," the yogi continued musingly,
"while I am wondering-inconsiderable as I am, and with the little
meditation I have done-if I have succeeded in pleasing God, and
what worth I may find in His eyes at the final reckoning."

"Sir, have you not been singleheartedly seeking God for a long
time?"

"I have not done much. Behari must have told you something of
my life.  For twenty years I occupied a secret grotto, meditating
eighteen hours a day. Then I moved to a more inaccessible cave
and remained there for twenty-five years, entering the yoga union
for twenty hours daily. I did not need sleep, for I was ever
with God. My body was more rested in the complete calmness of the
superconsciousness than it could be by the partial peace of the
ordinary subconscious state.

"The muscles relax during sleep, but the heart, lungs, and
circulatory system are constantly at work; they get no rest. In
superconsciousness, the internal organs remain in a state of suspended
animation, electrified by the cosmic energy. By such means I have
found it unnecessary to sleep for years. The time will come when
you too will dispense with sleep."

"My goodness, you have meditated for so long and yet are unsure
of the Lord's favor!" I gazed at him in astonishment. "Then what
about us poor mortals?"

"Well, don't you see, my dear boy, that God is Eternity Itself? To
assume that one can fully know Him by forty-five years of meditation
is rather a preposterous expectation. Babaji assures us, however,
that even a little meditation saves one from the dire fear of death
and after-death states. Do not fix your spiritual ideal on a small
mountain, but hitch it to the star of unqualified divine attainment.
If you work hard, you will get there."

Enthralled by the prospect, I asked him for further enlightening
words. He related a wondrous story of his first meeting with Lahiri
Mahasaya's guru, Babaji. {FN13-3} Around midnight Ram Gopal fell
into silence, and I lay down on my blankets. Closing my eyes, I
saw flashes of lightning; the vast space within me was a chamber
of molten light.  I opened my eyes and observed the same dazzling
radiance. The room became a part of that infinite vault which I
beheld with interior vision.

"Why don't you go to sleep?"

"Sir, how can I sleep in the presence of lightning, blazing whether
my eyes are shut or open?"

"You are blessed to have this experience; the spiritual radiations
are not easily seen." The saint added a few words of affection.

At dawn Ram Gopal gave me rock candies and said I must depart. I
felt such reluctance to bid him farewell that tears coursed down
my cheeks.

"I will not let you go empty-handed." The yogi spoke tenderly. "I
will do something for you."

He smiled and looked at me steadfastly. I stood rooted to the
ground, peace rushing like a mighty flood through the gates of my
eyes. I was instantaneously healed of a pain in my back, which had
troubled me intermittently for years. Renewed, bathed in a sea of
luminous joy, I wept no more. After touching the saint's feet, I
sauntered into the jungle, making my way through its tropical tangle
until I reached Tarakeswar.

There I made a second pilgrimage to the famous shrine, and prostrated
myself fully before the altar. The round stone enlarged before
my inner vision until it became the cosmical spheres, ring within
ring, zone after zone, all dowered with divinity.

I entrained happily an hour later for Calcutta. My travels ended,
not in the lofty mountains, but in the Himalayan presence of my
Master.

{FN13-1} Hand-played drums, used only for devotional music.

{FN13-2} One is reminded here of Dostoevski's observation: "A man
who bows down to nothing can never bear the burden of himself."

{FN13-3} See chapter 35.



CHAPTER: 14

AN EXPERIENCE IN COSMIC CONSCIOUSNESS

"I am here, Guruji." My shamefacedness spoke more eloquently for
me.

"Let us go to the kitchen and find something to eat." Sri Yukteswar's
manner was as natural as if hours and not days had separated us.

"Master, I must have disappointed you by my abrupt departure from
my duties here; I thought you might be angry with me."

"No, of course not! Wrath springs only from thwarted desires. I
do not expect anything from others, so their actions cannot be in
opposition to wishes of mine. I would not use you for my own ends;
I am happy only in your own true happiness."

"Sir, one hears of divine love in a vague way, but for the first
time I am having a concrete example in your angelic self! In the
world, even a father does not easily forgive his son if he leaves
his parent's business without warning. But you show not the slightest
vexation, though you must have been put to great inconvenience by
the many unfinished tasks I left behind."

We looked into each other's eyes, where tears were shining. A
blissful wave engulfed me; I was conscious that the Lord, in the
form of my guru, was expanding the small ardors of my heart into
the incompressible reaches of cosmic love.

A few mornings later I made my way to Master's empty sitting room.
I planned to meditate, but my laudable purpose was unshared by
disobedient thoughts. They scattered like birds before the hunter.

"Mukunda!" Sri Yukteswar's voice sounded from a distant inner
balcony.

I felt as rebellious as my thoughts. "Master always urges me to
meditate," I muttered to myself. "He should not disturb me when he
knows why I came to his room."

He summoned me again; I remained obstinately silent. The third time
his tone held rebuke.

"Sir, I am meditating," I shouted protestingly.

"I know how you are meditating," my guru called out, "with your
mind distributed like leaves in a storm! Come here to me."

Snubbed and exposed, I made my way sadly to his side.

"Poor boy, the mountains couldn't give what you wanted." Master
spoke caressively, comfortingly. His calm gaze was unfathomable.
"Your heart's desire shall be fulfilled."

Sri Yukteswar seldom indulged in riddles; I was bewildered. He
struck gently on my chest above the heart.

My body became immovably rooted; breath was drawn out of my lungs
as if by some huge magnet. Soul and mind instantly lost their
physical bondage, and streamed out like a fluid piercing light
from my every pore. The flesh was as though dead, yet in my intense
awareness I knew that never before had I been fully alive. My sense
of identity was no longer narrowly confined to a body, but embraced
the circumambient atoms. People on distant streets seemed to be
moving gently over my own remote periphery. The roots of plants and
trees appeared through a dim transparency of the soil; I discerned
the inward flow of their sap.

The whole vicinity lay bare before me. My ordinary frontal
vision was now changed to a vast spherical sight, simultaneously
all-perceptive.  Through the back of my head I saw men strolling far
down Rai Ghat Road, and noticed also a white cow who was leisurely
approaching. When she reached the space in front of the open ashram
gate, I observed her with my two physical eyes. As she passed by,
behind the brick wall, I saw her clearly still.

All objects within my panoramic gaze trembled and vibrated like
quick motion pictures. My body, Master's, the pillared courtyard,
the furniture and floor, the trees and sunshine, occasionally became
violently agitated, until all melted into a luminescent sea; even
as sugar crystals, thrown into a glass of water, dissolve after
being shaken. The unifying light alternated with materializations
of form, the metamorphoses revealing the law of cause and effect
in creation.

An oceanic joy broke upon calm endless shores of my soul. The Spirit
of God, I realized, is exhaustless Bliss; His body is countless
tissues of light. A swelling glory within me began to envelop towns,
continents, the earth, solar and stellar systems, tenuous nebulae,
and floating universes. The entire cosmos, gently luminous, like
a city seen afar at night, glimmered within the infinitude of
my being. The sharply etched global outlines faded somewhat at the
farthest edges; there I could see a mellow radiance, ever-undiminished.
It was indescribably subtle; the planetary pictures were formed of
a grosser light.

The divine dispersion of rays poured from an Eternal Source, blazing
into galaxies, transfigured with ineffable auras. Again and again
I saw the creative beams condense into constellations, then resolve
into sheets of transparent flame. By rhythmic reversion, sextillion
worlds passed into diaphanous luster; fire became firmament.

I cognized the center of the empyrean as a point of intuitive
perception in my heart. Irradiating splendor issued from my nucleus
to every part of the universal structure. Blissful AMRITA, the
nectar of immortality, pulsed through me with a quicksilverlike
fluidity. The creative voice of God I heard resounding as AUM,
{FN14-1} the vibration of the Cosmic Motor.

Suddenly the breath returned to my lungs. With a disappointment
almost unbearable, I realized that my infinite immensity was lost.
Once more I was limited to the humiliating cage of a body, not
easily accommodative to the Spirit. Like a prodigal child, I had
run away from my macrocosmic home and imprisoned myself in a narrow
microcosm.

My guru was standing motionless before me; I started to drop at his
holy feet in gratitude for the experience in cosmic consciousness
which I had long passionately sought. He held me upright, and spoke
calmly, unpretentiously.

"You must not get overdrunk with ecstasy. Much work yet remains
for you in the world. Come; let us sweep the balcony floor; then
we shall walk by the Ganges."

I fetched a broom; Master, I knew, was teaching me the secret of
balanced living. The soul must stretch over the cosmogonic abysses,
while the body performs its daily duties. When we set out later
for a stroll, I was still entranced in unspeakable rapture. I saw
our bodies as two astral pictures, moving over a road by the river
whose essence was sheer light.

"It is the Spirit of God that actively sustains every form and
force in the universe; yet He is transcendental and aloof in the
blissful uncreated void beyond the worlds of vibratory phenomena,"
{FN14-2} Master explained. "Saints who realize their divinity even
while in the flesh know a similar twofold existence. Conscientiously
engaging in earthly work, they yet remain immersed in an inward
beatitude. The Lord has created all men from the limitless joy
of His being. Though they are painfully cramped by the body, God
nevertheless expects that souls made in His image shall ultimately
rise above all sense identifications and reunite with Him."

The cosmic vision left many permanent lessons. By daily stilling
my thoughts, I could win release from the delusive conviction that
my body was a mass of flesh and bones, traversing the hard soil of
matter. The breath and the restless mind, I saw, were like storms
which lashed the ocean of light into waves of material forms-earth,
sky, human beings, animals, birds, trees. No perception of the
Infinite as One Light could be had except by calming those storms.
As often as I silenced the two natural tumults, I beheld the
multitudinous waves of creation melt into one lucent sea, even as
the waves of the ocean, their tempests subsiding, serenely dissolve
into unity.

A master bestows the divine experience of cosmic consciousness when
his disciple, by meditation, has strengthened his mind to a degree
where the vast vistas would not overwhelm him. The experience
can never be given through one's mere intellectual willingness or
open-mindedness. Only adequate enlargement by yoga practice and
devotional BHAKTI can prepare the mind to absorb the liberating
shock of omnipresence. It comes with a natural inevitability to
the sincere devotee. His intense craving begins to pull at God with
an irresistible force. The Lord, as the Cosmic Vision, is drawn by
the seeker's magnetic ardor into his range of consciousness.

I wrote, in my later years, the following poem, "Samadhi," endeavoring
to convey the glory of its cosmic state:

  Vanished the veils of light and shade,
  Lifted every vapor of sorrow,
  Sailed away all dawns of fleeting joy,
  Gone the dim sensory mirage.
  Love, hate, health, disease, life, death,
  Perished these false shadows on the screen of duality.
  Waves of laughter, scyllas of sarcasm, melancholic whirlpools,
  Melting in the vast sea of bliss.
  The storm of MAYA stilled
  By magic wand of intuition deep.
  The universe, forgotten dream, subconsciously lurks,
  Ready to invade my newly-wakened memory divine.
  I live without the cosmic shadow,
  But it is not, bereft of me;
  As the sea exists without the waves,
  But they breathe not without the sea.
  Dreams, wakings, states of deep TURIA sleep,
  Present, past, future, no more for me,
  But ever-present, all-flowing I, I, everywhere.
  Planets, stars, stardust, earth,
  Volcanic bursts of doomsday cataclysms,
  Creation's molding furnace,
  Glaciers of silent x-rays, burning electron floods,
  Thoughts of all men, past, present, to come,
  Every blade of grass, myself, mankind,
  Each particle of universal dust,
  Anger, greed, good, bad, salvation, lust,
  I swallowed, transmuted all
  Into a vast ocean of blood of my own one Being!
  Smoldering joy, oft-puffed by meditation
  Blinding my tearful eyes,
  Burst into immortal flames of bliss,
  Consumed my tears, my frame, my all.
  Thou art I, I am Thou,
  Knowing, Knower, Known, as One!
  Tranquilled, unbroken thrill, eternally living, ever-new peace!
  Enjoyable beyond imagination of expectancy, SAMADHI bliss!
  Not an unconscious state
  Or mental chloroform without wilful return,
  SAMADHI but extends my conscious realm
  Beyond limits of the mortal frame
  To farthest boundary of eternity
  Where I, the Cosmic Sea,
  Watch the little ego floating in Me.
  The sparrow, each grain of sand, fall not without My sight.
  All space floats like an iceberg in My mental sea.
  Colossal Container, I, of all things made.
  By deeper, longer, thirsty, guru-given meditation
  Comes this celestial SAMADHI.
  Mobile murmurs of atoms are heard,
  The dark earth, mountains, vales, lo! molten liquid!
  Flowing seas change into vapors of nebulae!
  AUM blows upon vapors, opening wondrously their veils,
  Oceans stand revealed, shining electrons,
  Till, at last sound of the cosmic drum,
  Vanish the grosser lights into eternal rays
  Of all-pervading bliss.
  From joy I came, for joy I live, in sacred joy I melt.
  Ocean of mind, I drink all creation's waves.
  Four veils of solid, liquid, vapor, light,
  Lift aright.
  Myself, in everything, enters the Great Myself.
  Gone forever, fitful, flickering shadows of mortal memory.
  Spotless is my mental sky, below, ahead, and high above.
  Eternity and I, one united ray.
  A tiny bubble of laughter, I
  Am become the Sea of Mirth Itself.

Sri Yukteswar taught me how to summon the blessed experience at will,
and also how to transmit it to others if their intuitive channels
were developed. For months I entered the ecstatic union, comprehending
why the UPANISHADS say God is RASA, "the most relishable." One day,
however, I took a problem to Master.

"I want to know, sir-when shall I find God?"

"You have found Him."

"O no, sir, I don't think so!"

My guru was smiling. "I am sure you aren't expecting a venerable
Personage, adorning a throne in some antiseptic corner of the
cosmos!  I see, however, that you are imagining that the possession
of miraculous powers is knowledge of God. One might have the whole
universe, and find the Lord elusive still! Spiritual advancement
is not measured by one's outward powers, but only by the depth of
his bliss in meditation.

"EVER-NEW JOY IS GOD. He is inexhaustible; as you continue your
meditations during the years, He will beguile you with an infinite
ingenuity. Devotees like yourself who have found the way to God never
dream of exchanging Him for any other happiness; He is seductive
beyond thought of competition.

"How quickly we weary of earthly pleasures! Desire for material
things is endless; man is never satisfied completely, and pursues
one goal after another. The 'something else' he seeks is the Lord,
who alone can grant lasting joy.

"Outward longings drive us from the Eden within; they offer false
pleasures which only impersonate soul-happiness. The lost paradise
is quickly regained through divine meditation. As God is unanticipatory
Ever-Newness, we never tire of Him. Can we be surfeited with bliss,
delightfully varied throughout eternity?"

"I understand now, sir, why saints call the Lord unfathomable. Even
everlasting life could not suffice to appraise Him."

"That is true; but He is also near and dear. After the mind has been
cleared by KRIYA YOGA of sensory obstacles, meditation furnishes
a twofold proof of God. Ever-new joy is evidence of His existence,
convincing to our very atoms. Also, in meditation one finds His
instant guidance, His adequate response to every difficulty."

"I see, Guruji; you have solved my problem." I smiled gratefully.
"I do realize now that I have found God, for whenever the joy of
meditation has returned subconsciously during my active hours, I
have been subtly directed to adopt the right course in everything,
even details."

"Human life is beset with sorrow until we know how to tune in with
the Divine Will, whose 'right course' is often baffling to the
egoistic intelligence. God bears the burden of the cosmos; He alone
can give unerring counsel."

{FN14-1} "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God,
and the Word was God."-JOHN 1:1.

{FN14-2} "For the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all
judgment unto the Son."-JOHN 5:22. "No man hath seen God at any
time; the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father,
he hath declared him."-JOHN 1:18. "Verily, verily, I say unto you,
he that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also;
and greater works than these shall he do; because I go unto my
Father."-JOHN 14:12. "But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost,
whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things,
and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said
to you."-JOHN 14:26.

These Biblical words refer to the threefold nature of God as Father,
Son, Holy Ghost (SAT, TAT, AUM in the Hindu scriptures). God the
Father is the Absolute, Unmanifested, existing BEYOND vibratory
creation. God the Son is the Christ Consciousness (Brahma or
KUTASTHA CHAITANYA) existing WITHIN vibratory creation; this Christ
Consciousness is the "only begotten" or sole reflection of the
Uncreated Infinite. Its outward manifestation or "witness" is AUM
or Holy Ghost, the divine, creative, invisible power which structures
all creation through vibration. AUM the blissful Comforter is heard
in meditation and reveals to the devotee the ultimate Truth.



CHAPTER: 15

THE CAULIFLOWER ROBBERY

"Master, a gift for you! These six huge cauliflowers were planted
with my hands; I have watched over their growth with the tender
care of a mother nursing her child." I presented the basket of
vegetables with a ceremonial flourish.

"Thank you!" Sri Yukteswar's smile was warm with appreciation.
"Please keep them in your room; I shall need them tomorrow for a
special dinner."

I had just arrived in Puri {FN15-1} to spend my college summer
vacation with my guru at his seaside hermitage. Built by Master
and his disciples, the cheerful little two-storied retreat fronts
on the Bay of Bengal.

I awoke early the following morning, refreshed by the salty sea
breezes and the charm of my surroundings. Sri Yukteswar's melodious
voice was calling; I took a look at my cherished cauliflowers and
stowed them neatly under my bed.

"Come, let us go to the beach." Master led the way; several young
disciples and myself followed in a scattered group. Our guru surveyed
us in mild criticism.

"When our Western brothers walk, they usually take pride in unison.
Now, please march in two rows; keep rhythmic step with one another."
Sri Yukteswar watched as we obeyed; he began to sing: "Boys go to
and fro, in a pretty little row." I could not but admire the ease
with which Master was able to match the brisk pace of his young
students.

"Halt!" My guru's eyes sought mine. "Did you remember to lock the
back door of the hermitage?"

[Illustration: MY GURU'S SEASIDE HERMITAGE AT PURI A steady stream
of visitors poured from the world into the hermitage tranquillity.
A number of learned men came with the expectation of meeting an
orthodox religionist. A supercilious smile or a glance of amused
tolerance occasionally betrayed that the newcomers anticipated
nothing more than a few pious platitudes. Yet their reluctant
departure would bring an expressed conviction that Sri Yukteswar had
shown precise insight into their specialized fields of knowledge.
My guru always had young resident disciples in his hermitage.
He directed their minds and lives with that careful discipline in
which the word "disciple" is etymologically rooted.--see puri.jpg]

"I think so, sir."

Sri Yukteswar was silent for a few minutes, a half-suppressed smile
on his lips. "No, you forgot," he said finally. "Divine contemplation
must not be made an excuse for material carelessness. You have
neglected your duty in safeguarding the ashram; you must be punished."

I thought he was obscurely joking when he added: "Your six cauliflowers
will soon be only five."

We turned around at Master's orders and marched back until we were
close to the hermitage.

"Rest awhile. Mukunda, look across the compound on our left; observe
the road beyond. A certain man will arrive there presently; he will
be the means of your chastisement."

I concealed my vexation at these incomprehensible remarks. A peasant
soon appeared on the road; he was dancing grotesquely and flinging
his arms about with meaningless gestures. Almost paralyzed with
curiosity, I glued my eyes on the hilarious spectacle. As the man
reached a point in the road where he would vanish from our view,
Sri Yukteswar said, "Now, he will return."

The peasant at once changed his direction and made for the rear
of the ashram. Crossing a sandy tract, he entered the building by
the back door. I had left it unlocked, even as my guru had said.
The man emerged shortly, holding one of my prized cauliflowers. He
now strode along respectably, invested with the dignity of possession.

The unfolding farce, in which my role appeared to be that of bewildered
victim, was not so disconcerting that I failed in indignant pursuit.
I was halfway to the road when Master recalled me. He was shaking
from head to foot with laughter.

"That poor crazy man has been longing for a cauliflower," he explained
between outbursts of mirth. "I thought it would be a good idea if
he got one of yours, so ill-guarded!"

I dashed to my room, where I found that the thief, evidently one
with a vegetable fixation, had left untouched my gold rings, watch,
and money, all lying openly on the blanket. He had crawled instead
under the bed where, completely hidden from casual sight, one of
my cauliflowers had aroused his singlehearted desire.

I asked Sri Yukteswar that evening to explain the incident which
had, I thought, a few baffling features.

My guru shook his head slowly. "You will understand it someday.
Science will soon discover a few of these hidden laws."

When the wonders of radio burst some years later on an astounded
world, I remembered Master's prediction. Age-old concepts of time
and space were annihilated; no peasant's home so narrow that London
or Calcutta could not enter! The dullest intelligence enlarged
before indisputable proof of one aspect of man's omnipresence.

The "plot" of the cauliflower comedy can be best understood by a
radio analogy. Sri Yukteswar was a perfect human radio. Thoughts
are no more than very gentle vibrations moving in the ether. Just
as a sensitized radio picks up a desired musical number out of
thousands of other programs from every direction, so my guru had
been able to catch the thought of the half-witted man who hankered
for a cauliflower, out of the countless thoughts of broadcasting
human wills in the world. {FN15-2} By his powerful will, Master was
also a human broadcasting station, and had successfully directed
the peasant to reverse his steps and go to a certain room for a
single cauliflower.

Intuition {FN15-3} is soul guidance, appearing naturally in man during
those instants when his mind is calm. Nearly everyone has had the
experience of an inexplicably correct "hunch," or has transferred
his thoughts effectively to another person.

The human mind, free from the static of restlessness, can perform
through its antenna of intuition all the functions of complicated
radio mechanisms-sending and receiving thoughts, and tuning out
undesirable ones. As the power of a radio depends on the amount of
electrical current it can utilize, so the human radio is energized
according to the power of will possessed by each individual.

All thoughts vibrate eternally in the cosmos. By deep concentration, a
master is able to detect the thoughts of any mind, living or dead.
Thoughts are universally and not individually rooted; a truth
cannot be created, but only perceived. The erroneous thoughts of
man result from imperfections in his discernment. The goal of yoga
science is to calm the mind, that without distortion it may mirror
the divine vision in the universe.

Radio and television have brought the instantaneous sound and sight
of remote persons to the firesides of millions: the first faint
scientific intimations that man is an all-pervading spirit. Not
a body confined to a point in space, but the vast soul, which the
ego in most barbaric modes conspires in vain to cramp.

"Very strange, very wonderful, seemingly very improbable phenomena
may yet appear which, when once established, will not astonish us
more than we are now astonished at all that science has taught us
during the last century," Charles Robert Richet, Nobel Prizeman in
physiology, has declared. "It is assumed that the phenomena which
we now accept without surprise, do not excite our astonishment
because they are understood. But this is not the case. If they do
not surprise us it is not because they are understood, it is because
they are familiar; for if that which is not understood ought to
surprise us, we should be surprised at everything-the fall of a
stone thrown into the air, the acorn which becomes an oak, mercury
which expands when it is heated, iron attracted by a magnet,
phosphorus which burns when it is rubbed. . . . The science of
today is a light matter; the revolutions and evolutions which it
will experience in a hundred thousand years will far exceed the
most daring anticipations. The truths-those surprising, amazing,
unforeseen truths-which our descendants will discover, are even
now all around us, staring us in the eyes, so to speak, and yet
we do not see them. But it is not enough to say that we do not see
them; we do not wish to see them; for as soon as an unexpected and
unfamiliar fact appears, we try to fit it into the framework of
the commonplaces of acquired knowledge, and we are indignant that
anyone should dare to experiment further."

A humorous occurrence took place a few days after I had been so
implausibly robbed of a cauliflower. A certain kerosene lamp could
not be found. Having so lately witnessed my guru's omniscient
insight, I thought he would demonstrate that it was child's play
to locate the lamp.

Master perceived my expectation. With exaggerated gravity he
questioned all ashram residents. A young disciple confessed that
he had used the lamp to go to the well in the back yard.

Sri Yukteswar gave the solemn counsel: "Seek the lamp near the
well."

I rushed there; no lamp! Crestfallen, I returned to my guru. He
was now laughing heartily, without compunction for my disillusionment.

"Too bad I couldn't direct you to the vanished lamp; I am not a
fortune teller!" With twinkling eyes, he added, "I am not even a
satisfactory Sherlock Holmes!"

I realized that Master would never display his powers when challenged,
or for a triviality.

Delightful weeks sped by. Sri Yukteswar was planning a religious
procession. He asked me to lead the disciples over the town and
beach of Puri. The festive day dawned as one of the hottest of the
summer.

"Guruji, how can I take the barefooted students over the fiery
sands?" I spoke despairingly.

"I will tell you a secret," Master responded. "The Lord will send
an umbrella of clouds; you all shall walk in comfort."

I happily organized the procession; our group started from the
ashram with a SAT-SANGA banner. {FN15-4} Designed by Sri Yukteswar,
it bore the symbol of the single {FN15-5} eye, the telescopic gaze
of intuition.

No sooner had we left the hermitage than the part of the sky which
was overhead became filled with clouds as though by magic. To the
