desert. And the glowing sand shall become a pool, and the thirsty
ground springs of water.' ISAIAH xxxv. 6, 7.


What a picture is painted in these verses! The dreary wilderness
stretches before us, monotonous, treeless, in some parts bearing a
scanty vegetation which flourishes in early spring and dies before
fierce summer heats, but for the most part utterly desolate, the sand
blinding the eyes, the ground cracked and gaping as if athirst for the
rain that will not fall; over it the tantalising mirage dancing in
mockery, and amid the hot sand the yelp of the jackals. What does this
dead land want? One thing alone--water. Could that be poured upon it,
all would be changed; nothing else will do any good. And it comes.
Suddenly it bursts from the sand, and streams bring life along the
desert. It gathers into placid lakes, with their whispering reeds and
nodding rushes, and the thick cool grass round their margins. The foul
beasts that wandered through dry places seeking rest are drowned out.
So full of blessed change will be the coming of the Lord, of which all
this context speaks. Mark that this burst of waters is when 'the Lord
shall come,' and that it is the reason for the restoration of lost
powers in men, and especially for a chorus of praise from dumb lips.
This, then, is the central blessing. It is not merely a joyful
transformation, but it is the reason for a yet more joyful
transformation (chap. xliv. 3). Recall Christ's words to the Samaritan
woman and in the Temple on the great day of the Feast.

Then this is pre-eminently a description of the work of Christ.

I. Christ brings the Supernatural Communication of a New Life.

We may fairly regard this metaphor as setting forth the very deepest
characteristic of the gospel. Consider man's need, as typified in the
image of the desert. Mark that the supply for that need must come from
without; that coming from without, it must be lodged in the heart of
the race; that the supernatural communication of a new life and power
is the very essence of the work of Christ; that such a communication is
the only thing adequate to produce these wondrous effects.

II. This new life slakes men's thirst.

The pangs and tortures of the waterless wilderness. The thirst of human
souls; they long, whether they know it or not, for--

   Truth for Understanding.
   Love for Heart.
   Basis and Guidance for Will and Effort.
   Cleansing for Conscience.
   Adequate objects for their powers.

They need that all these should be in One.

The gnawing pain of our thirst is not a myth; it is the secret of man's
restlessness. We are ever on the march, not only because change is the
law of the world, nor only because effort and progress are the law for
civilised men, but because, like caravans in the desert, we have to
search for water.

In Christ it is slaked; all is found there.

III. The Communication of this New Life turns Illusions into Realities.

'The mirage shall become a pool.' Life without Christ is but a long
illusion. 'Sin makes a mock of fools.' How seldom are hopes fulfilled,
and how still less frequently are they, when fulfilled, as good as we
painted them! The prismatic splendours of the rain bow, which gleam
before us and which we toil to catch, are but grey rain-drops when
caught. Joys attract and, attained, have incompleteness and a tang of
bitterness. The fish is never so heavy when landed on the sward as it
felt when struggling on our hook. 'All is vanity'--yes, if creatures
and things temporal are pursued as our good. But nothing is vanity, if
we have the life in us which Jesus comes to give. His Gospel gives
solid, unmingled joys, sure promises which are greater when fulfilled
than when longed for, certain hopes whose most brilliant colours are
duller than those of the realities. The half has not been told of the
'things which God hath prepared for them that love Him.'

Sure Promises.

A certain Hope.

IV. This New Life gives Fruitfulness. It stimulates all our nature. A
godless life is in a very tragic sense barren, and a wilderness. There
is in it nothing really worth doing, nor anything that will last.
Christ gives Power, Motive, Pattern, and makes a life of holy activity
possible. The works done by men apart from Him are, if measured by the
whole relations and capacities of the doers, unfruitful works, however
they may seem laden with ruddy clusters. It is only lives into which
that river of God which is full of water flows that bring forth fruit,
and whose fruit remains. The desert irrigated becomes a garden of the
Lord.

Note, too, how this river drowns out wild beasts. The true way of
conquering evil is to turn the river into it. Cultivate, and weeds die.
The expulsive power of a new affection is the most potent instrument
for perfecting character.

What is the use of water if we do not drink? We may perish with thirst
even on the river's bank. 'If any man thirst, let him come to Me and
drink.'




THE KING'S HIGHWAY

'And an highway shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called the
way of holiness; the unclean shall not pass over it; but it shall be
for those: the wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein. No
lion shall be there, nor any ravenous beast shall go up thereon, it
shall not be found there; but the redeemed shall walk there.'--ISAIAH
xxxv. 8, 9.


We can fancy what it is to be lost in a forest where a traveller may
ride round in a circle, thinking he is advancing, till he dies. But it
is as easy to be lost in a wilderness, where there is nothing to see,
as in a wood where one can see nothing. And there is something even
more ghastly in being lost below the broad heavens in the open face of
day than 'in the close covert of innumerous boughs.' The monotonous
swells of the sand-heaps, the weary expanse stretching right away to
the horizon, no land-marks but the bleaching bones of former victims,
the gigantic sameness, the useless light streaming down, and in the
centre one tiny, black speck toiling vainly, rushing madly hither and
thither--a lost man--till he desperately flings himself down and lets
death bury him, that is the one picture suggested by the text. The
other is of that same wilderness, but across it a mighty king has flung
up a broad, lofty embankment, a highway raised above the sands, cutting
across them so conspicuously that even an idiot could not help seeing
it, so high above the land around that the lion's spring falls far
beneath it, and the supple tiger skulks baffled at its base. It is like
one of those roads which the terrible energy of conquering Rome carried
straight as an arrow from the milestone in the Forum over mountains,
across rivers and deserts, morasses and forests, to flash along them
the lightning of her legions, and over whose solid blocks we travel
to-day in many a land.

The prophet has seen in his vision the blind and deaf cured, the
capacities of human nature destroyed by sin restored. He has told us
that this miraculous change has come from the opening of a spring of
new life in the midst of man's thirsty desert, and now he gets before
us, in yet another image, another aspect of the glorious change which
is to follow that coming of the Lord to save, which filled the farthest
horizon of his vision. The desert shall have a plain path on which
those diseased men who have been healed journey. Life shall no longer
be trackless, but God will, by His coming, prepare paths that we should
walk in them; and as He has given the lame man power to walk, so will
he also provide the way by which His happy pilgrims will journey to
their home.

I. The pathless wandering of godless lives.

The old, old comparison of life to a journey is very natural and very
pathetic. It expresses life's ceaseless change; every day carries us
into a new scene, every day the bends of the road shut out some happy
valley where we fain would have rested, every day brings new faces, new
associations, new difficulties, and even if the same recur, yet it is
with such changes that they are substantially new, and of each day's
march it is true, even when life is most monotonous, that 'ye have not
passed this way heretofore.' It expresses life's ceaseless effort and
constant plodding. To-day's march does not secure to-morrow's rest,
but, however footsore and weary, we have to move on, like some child
dragged along by a careless nurse. It expresses the awful crumbling
away of life beneath us. The road has an end, and each step takes us
nearer to it. The numbers that face us on the milestones slowly and
surely decrease; we pass the last and on we go, tramp, tramp, and we
cannot stop till we reach the narrow chamber, cold and dark, where, at
any rate, we have got the long march over.

But to many men, the journey of life is one which has no definite
direction deliberately chosen, which has no all-inclusive aim, which
has no steady progress. There may be much running hither and thither,
but it is as aimless as the marchings of a fly upon a window, as busy
and yet as uncertain as that of the ants who bustle about on an
ant-hill.

Now that is the idea, which our text implies, of all the activity of a
godless life, that it is not a steady advance to a chosen goal, but a
rushing up and down in a trackless desert, with many immense exertions
all thrown away. Then, in contrast, it puts this great thought: that
God has come to us and made for us a path for our feet.

II. The highway that God casts up.

Of course that coming we take to be Christ's coming, and we have just
to consider the manner in which His coming fulfils this great promise,
and has made in the trackless wilderness a way for us to walk in.

1. Christ gives us a Definite Aim for Life. I know, of course, that men
may have this apart from Him, definite enough in all conscience. But
such aims are unworthy of men's whole capacities. Not one of them is
fit to be made the exclusive, all-embracing purpose of a life, and,
taken together, they are so multifarious that in their diversity they
come to be equal to none. How many we have all had! Most of us are like
men who zig-zag about, chasing after butterflies! Nor are any such aims
certain to be reached during life, and they all are certain to be lost
at death.

Godless men are enticed on like some dumb creature lured to
slaughter-house by a bunch of fodder--once inside, down comes the
pole-axe.

But Christ gives us a definite aim which is worthy of a man, which
includes all others; which binds this life and the next into one.

2. Christ gives us distinct knowledge of whither we should go. It is
not enough to give general directions; we need to know what our next
step is to be. It is of no avail that we see the shining turrets far
off on the hill, if all the valleys between are unknown and trackless.
Well: we have Him to point us our course. He is the exemplar--the true
ideal of human nature. Hour by hour His pattern fits to our lives.
True, we shall often be in perplexity, but that perplexity will clear
itself by patient thought, by holding our wills in suspense till He
speaks, and by an honest wish to go right. There will no longer be
doubt as to what is our law, though there may be as to the application
of it. We are not to be guided by men's maxims, nor by the standards
and patterns round us, but by Him.

3. Christ gives means by which we can reach the aim. He does so by
supplying a stimulus to our activity, in the motive of His love; by the
removal of the hindrances arising from sin, through His redeeming work;
by the gifts of new life from His Spirit.

'The labour of the foolish wearieth every one of them, because he
knoweth not how to go to the city.' But he that follows Jesus treads
the right way to the city of habitation.

4. Christ goes with us. The obscure words, 'It shall be for those' are
by some rendered, 'He shall be with them,' and we may take them so, as
referring to the presence with His happy pilgrims of the Lord Himself.
Perhaps Isaiah may have been casting back a thought to the desert
march, where the pillar led the host. But at all events we have the
same companion to 'talk with us by the way,' and make 'our hearts burn
within us,' as had the two disconsolate pedestrians on the road to
Emmaus. It is Jesus who goes before us, whether He leads us to green
pastures and waters of quietness or through valleys of the shadow of
death, and we can be smitten by no evil, since He is with us.

III. The travellers upon God's highway.

Two conditions are laid down in the text. One is negative-the unclean
can find no footing there. It is 'the way of holiness,' not only
because holiness is in some sense the goal to which it leads, but still
more, because only holy feet can tread it, holy at least in the
travellers' aspiration and inward consecration, though still needing to
be washed daily. One is positive--it is 'the simple' who shall not err
therein. They who distrust themselves and their own skill to find or
force a path through life's jungle, and trust themselves to higher
guidance, are they whose feet will be kept in the way.

No lion or ravenous beast can spring or creep up thereon. Simple
keeping on Christ's highway elevates us above temptations and evils of
all sorts, whether nightly prowlers or daylight foes.

This generation is boasting or complaining that old landmarks are
blotted out, ancient paths broken, footmarks obliterated, stars hid,
and mist shrouding the desert. But Christ still guides, and His promise
still holds good: 'He that followeth Me shall not walk in the darkness,
but shall have the light of life.' The alternative for each 'traveller
between life and death' is to tread in His footsteps or to 'wander in
the wilderness in a solitary way, hungry and thirsty,' with fainting
soul. Let us make the ancient prayer ours: 'See if there be any wicked
way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting.'




WHAT LIFE'S JOURNEY MAY BE

'The redeemed shall walk there: And the ransomed of the Lord shall
return, and come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their
heads: they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall
flee away.'--ISAIAH XXXV 9,10.


We have here the closing words of Isaiah's prophecy. It has been
steadily rising, and now it has reached the summit. Men restored to all
their powers, a supernatural communication of a new life, a pathway for
our journey--these have been the visions of the preceding verses, and
now the prophet sees the happy pilgrims flocking along the raised way,
and hears some faint strains of their glad music, and he marks them,
rank after rank, entering the city of their solemnities, and through
the gates can behold them invested with joy and gladness, while sorrow
and sighing, like some night-loving birds shrinking from the blaze of
that better sun which lights the city, spread their black wings and
flee away.

The noble rhythm of our English version rises here to a strain of
pathetic music, the very cadence of which stirs thoughts that lie too
deep for tears, and one shrinks from taking these lofty words of
immortal hope--which life's sorrows have interpreted, I trust, for many
of us--as the text of a sermon. But I would fain try whether some of
their gracious sweetness and power may not survive even our rude
handling of them.

The prophet here is not only speaking of the literal return of his
brethren from captivity. The place which this prophecy holds at the
very close of the book, the noble loftiness of the language, the entire
absence of any details or specific allusions which compel reference to
the Captivity, would be sufficient of themselves to make us suspect
that there was very much more here. The structure of prophecy is
misunderstood unless it be recognised that all the history of Israel
was itself a prediction, a great supernatural system of types and
shadows, and that all the interventions of the divine hand are one in
principle, and all foretell the great intervention of redeeming love,
in the person of Jesus Christ. Nor need that be unlikely in the eyes of
any who believe that Christ's coming is the centre of the world's
history, and that there is in prophecy a supernatural element. We are
not reading our own fancies into Scripture; we are not using, in
allowable freedom, words which had another meaning altogether, to adorn
our own theology, but we are apprehending the innermost meaning of
prophecy, when we see in it Christ and His salvation (1 Peter i. 10).

We have then here a picture of what Christ does for us weary journeyers
on life's road,

I. Who are the travellers?

'Redeemed,' 'ransomed of the Lord.' Israel had in its past history one
great act, under the imagery of which all future deliverances were
prophesied. The events of the Exodus were the great storehouse from
which prophets drew the clothing of their brightest hopes; and that is
a lesson for us of how to use the history of God's past deliverances.
They believed that each transitory act was a revelation of an
unchanging purpose and an unexhausted power, and that it would be
repeated over and over again. Experience supplied the material out of
which Hope wove its fairest webs, but Faith drove the shuttle. Here the
names which describe the pilgrims come from the old story. They are
slaves, purchased or otherwise set free from captivity by a divine act.
The epithets are transferred to the New Testament, and become the
standing designation for those who have been delivered by Christ.

That designation, 'ransomed of the Lord,' opens out into the great
evangelical thoughts which are the very life-blood of vital
Christianity.

Emancipation from bondage is the first thing that we all need. 'He that
committeth sin is the slave of sin.' An iron yoke presses on every neck.

The needed emancipation can only be obtained by a ransom price. The
question of to whom the ransom is paid is not in the horizon of prophet
or apostle or of Jesus Himself, in using this metaphor. What is
strongly in their minds is that a great surrender must be greatly made
by the Emancipator.

Jesus conceived of Himself as giving 'His life a ransom for the many.'

The emancipation must be a divine act. It surpasses any created power.

There can be no happy pilgrims unless they are first set free.

II. The end of the journey.

'They shall come to Zion.' It is one great distinctive characteristic
and blessedness of the Christian conception of the future that it takes
away from it all the chilling sense of strangeness, arising from
ignorance and lack of experience, and invests it with the attraction of
being the mother-city of us all. So the pilgrims are not travelling a
dreary road into the common darkness, but are like colonists who visit
England for the first time, and are full of happy anticipations of
'going home,' though they have never seen its shores.

That conception of the future perfect state as a 'city' includes the
ideas of happy social life, of a settled polity, of stability and
security. The travellers who were often solitary on the march will all
be together there. The nomads, who had to leave their camping-place
each morning and let the fire that cheered them in the night die down
into a little ring of grey ashes, will 'go no more out,' but yet make
endless progress within the gates. The defenceless travellers, who were
fain to make the best 'laager' they could, and keep vigilant watch for
human and bestial enemies crouching beyond the ring of light from the
camp-fires, are safe at last, and they that swallowed them up shall be
far away.

Contrast the future outlook of the noblest minds in heathenism with the
calm certainty which the gospel has put within the reach of the
simplest! 'Blessed are your eyes, for they see.'

III. The joy of the road.

The pilgrims do not plod wearily in silence, but, like the tribes going
up to the feasts, burst out often, as they journey, into song. They are
like Jehoshaphat's soldiers, who marched to the fight with the singers
in the van chanting 'Give thanks unto the Lord, for His mercy endureth
for ever.' The Christian life should be a joyful life, ever echoing
with the 'high praises of God.' However difficult the march, there is
good reason for song, and it helps to overcome the difficulties. 'A
merry heart goes all the day, a sad heart tires in a mile.' Why should
the ransomed pilgrims sing? For present blessings, for deliverance from
the burden of self and sin, for communion with God, for light shed on
the meaning of life, and for the sure anticipation of future bliss.

'Everlasting joy on their heads.' Other joys are transitory. It is not
only 'we poets' who 'in our youth begin with gladness,' whereof 'cometh
in the end despondency and madness'; but, in a measure, these are the
outlines of the sequence in all godless lives. The world's festal
wreathes wilt and wither in the hot fumes of the banqueting house, and
'the crown of pride shall be trodden under foot.' But joy of Christ's
giving 'shall remain,' and even before we sit at the feast, we may have
our brows wreathed with a garland 'that fadeth not away.'

IV. The perfecting of joy at last.

'They shall obtain joy and gladness': but had they not had it on their
heads as they marched? Yes; but at last they have it in perfect measure
and manner. The flame that burned but dimly in the heavy air of earth
flashes up into new brightness in the purer atmosphere of the city.

And one part of its perfecting is the removal of all its opposites.
Sorrow ends when sin and the discipline that sin needs have ended. 'The
inhabitant shall not say: I am sick; the people that dwell therein
shall be forgiven their iniquity.' Sighing ends when weariness, loss,
physical pain, and all the other ills that flesh is heir to have ceased
to vex and weigh upon the spirit. Life purges the dross of imperfection
from character. Death purges the alloy of sorrow and sighing from joy,
and leaves the perfected spirit possessor of the pure gold of perfect
and eternal gladness.




THE TRIUMPH OF FAITH

'And Hezekiah received the letter from the hand of the messengers, and
read it: and Hezekiah went up unto the house of the Lord, and spread it
before the Lord. 15. And Hezekiah prayed unto the Lord, saying, 16. O
Lord of hosts, God of Israel, that dwellest between the cherubims, Thou
art the God, even Thou alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth: Thou
hast made heaven and earth. 17. Incline Thine ear, O Lord, and hear;
open Thine eyes, O Lord, and see: and hear all the words of
Sennacherib, which hath sent to reproach the living God. 18. Of a
truth, Lord, the kings of Assyria have laid waste all the nations, and
their countries, 19. And have cast their gods into the fire: for they
were no gods, but the work of men's hands, wood and stone: therefore
they have destroyed them. 20. Now therefore, O Lord our God, save us
from his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that Thou
art the Lord, even Thou only. 21. Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent unto
Hezekiah, saying. Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Whereas thou hast
prayed to Me against Sennacherib king of Assyria.... 33. Therefore thus
saith the Lord concerning the king of Assyria, He shall not come into
this city, nor shoot an arrow there, nor come before it with shields,
nor cast a bank against it. 34. By the way that he came, by the same
shall he return, and shall not come into this city, saith the Lord. 35.
For I will defend this city to save it for mine own sake, and for my
servant David's sake. 36. Then the angel of the Lord went forth, and
smote in the camp of the Assyrians a hundred and fourscore and five
thousand: and when they arose early in the morning, behold, they were
all dead corpses. 37. So Sennacherib king of Assyria departed, and went
and returned, and dwelt at Nineveh. 38. And it came to pass, as he was
worshipping in the house of Nisroch his god, that Adrammelech and
Sharezer his sons smote him with the sword; and they escaped into the
land of Armenia: and Esarhaddon his you reigned in his stead.'--ISAIAH
xxxvii. 14-21, 33-38.


Is trust in Jehovah folly or wisdom? That was the question raised by
Sennacherib's invasion. A glance at the preceding chapters will show
how the high military official, 'the rabshakeh,' or chief of the
officers, shaped all his insolent and yet skilful mixture of threats
and promises so as to demonstrate the vanity of trust in Egypt or in
Jehovah, or in any but 'the great king.' Isaiah had been labouring to
lift his countrymen to the height of reliance on Jehovah alone, and now
the crucial test of the truth of his contention had come. On the one
hand were Sennacherib and his host, flushed with victory, and sure of
crushing this puny kinglet Hezekiah and his obstinate little city,
perched on its rock. On the other was nothing but a prophet's word.
Where is the stronger force? And does political prudence dictate
reliance on the Unseen or on the visible? The moment is the crisis of
Isaiah's work, and this narrative has been placed, with true insight
into its importance, at the close of the first half of this book.

To grasp the significance of the text the preceding events have to be
remembered. Hezekiah's kingdom had been overrun, and tribute exacted
from him. The rabshakeh had been sent from the main body of the
Assyrian army, which was down at Lachish in the Philistine low country
on the road to Egypt, in order to try to secure Jerusalem by promises
and threats, since it was too important a post to leave in the rear, if
Egypt was to be invaded. That attempt having failed, and the Egyptian
forces being in motion, this new effort was made to induce Hezekiah to
surrender. A letter was sent, whether accompanied by any considerable
armed force or no does not appear. At this point the narrative begins.
It may be best studied as an illustration of the trial of faith, its
refuge, its pleading, and its deliverance.

I. Note the trial of faith. Rabshakeh had derided the obstinate
confidence in Jehovah, which kept these starving men on the walls
grimly silent in spite of his coaxing. The letter of Sennacherib harps
on the same string. It is written in a tone of assumed friendly
remonstrance, and lays out with speciousness the apparent grounds for
calling trust in Jehovah absurdity. There are no threats in it. It is
all an appeal to common sense and political prudence. It marshals
undeniable facts. Experience has shown the irresistible power of
Assyria. There have been plenty of other little nations which have
trusted in their local deities, and what has become of them? Barbarous
names are flourished in Hezekiah's face, and their wasted dominions are
pointed to as warnings against his committing a parallel folly. There
is nothing in the letter which might not have been said by a friend,
and nothing which was not said by the Jews who had lost their faith in
their God. It was but the putting into plain words of what
'common-sense' and faint faith had often whispered to Hezekiah. The
very absence of temper or demand in the letter gives it an aspect of
that 'sweet reasonableness' so dear to sense-bound souls.

_Mutatis mutandis_, the letter may stand for a specimen of the
arguments which worldly prudence brings to shake faith, in all ages.
We, too, are assailed by much that sounds most forcible from the point
of view of mere earthly calculation. Sennacherib does not lie in
boasting of his victories. He and his shoals of soldiers are very real
and potent. It does seem madness for one little kingdom to stand out,
and all the more so because its king is cooped up in his city, as the
cuneiform inscription proudly tells, 'like a bird in a cage,' and all
the rest of his land is in the conqueror's grip. They who look only at
the things seen cannot but think the men of faith mad. They who look at
the things unseen cannot but know that the men of sense are fools. The
latter elaborately prove that the former are impotent, but they have
left out one factor in their calculations, and that is God. One man and
God at his back are stronger than Sennacherib and all his mercenaries.

II. Note the refuge of tempted faith. What was Hezekiah to do with the
crafty missive? It was hoped that he would listen to reason, and come
down from his perch. But he neither yielded nor took counsel with his
servants, but, like a devout man, went into the house of the Lord, and
spread the letter before the Lord. It would have gone hard with him if
he had not been to the house of the Lord many a time before. It is not
easy to find our way thither for the first time, when our eyes are
blinded by tears or our way darkened by calamities. But faith
instinctively turns to God when anything goes wrong, because it has
been accustomed to turn to Him when all was right, according to the
world's estimate of right and wrong. Whither should the burdened heart
betake itself but to Him who daily bears our burdens? The impulse to
tell God all troubles is as truly a mark of the faithful soul as the
impulse to tell everything to the beloved is the life-breath of love.

The act of spreading the letter before the Lord is an eloquent symbol,
which some prosaic and learned commentators have been dull enough to
call gross, and to compare to Buddhist praying-mills! Its meaning is
expressed in the prayer which follows. It is faith's appeal to His
knowledge. It is faith's casting of its burden on the Lord. Our faith
is of little power to bless, unless it impels us to take God into
confidence in regard to everything which troubles us. If the letter is
not grave enough to be spread before _Him_, it is too small to annoy
_us_. If we truly live in fellowship with God, we shall find ourselves
in His house, with the cause of our trouble in our hands, before we
have time to think. Instinct acts more quickly than reason, and, if our
faith be vital, it will not need to be argued into speaking to God of
all that weighs upon us.

III. Note the pleading of faith. Hezekiah's address to God is no mere
formal recapitulation of divine names, but is the effort of faith to
grasp firmly the truths which the enemy denies, and on which it builds.
So considered, the accumulation of titles in verse 16 is very
instructive, and shows how a trustful soul puts forth the energy of its
faith in summoning to mind the great aspects of the divine name as
bulwarks against suggested fears, and bases of supplication. Hezekiah
appeals to 'the God of Hosts,' the Ruler of all the embattled forces of
the universe, as well as of the armies of angels. What is Sennacherib's
array compared with these? He appeals to the 'God of Israel,' as
pleading the ancient relationship, which binds the unchangeable
Guardian of the people to be still what He has been, and casts the
responsibility of Israel's preservation upon Him. He appeals to Him
'who sits between the cherubim,' as thence defending and filling the
threatened city. He grasps the thought that Jehovah is 'God alone' with
a vividness which is partly due no doubt to Isaiah's teaching, but is
also the indignant recoil of faith from the assumption of the letter,
that Jehovah was but as the beaten deities of Gozan and the rest. Faith
clings the more tenaciously to truths denied, as a dog will hold on to
the stick that one tries to pull from it.

Thus, having heartened himself and pled with God by all these names,
Hezekiah comes to his petition. It is but translating into words the
symbol of spreading the letter before God. He asks God to behold and to
hear the defiant words. Prayer tells God what it knows that He knows
already, for it relieves the burdened heart to tell Him. It asks Him to
see and hear what it knows that He does see and hear. But the prayer is
not for mere observance followed by no divine act, but for taking
knowledge as the precursor of the appropriate help. Of such seeing and
hearing by God, believing prayer is the appointed condition. 'Your
Father knoweth what things ye have need of, before ye ask Him'; but
that is not a reason for silence, but for supplication.

Hezekiah rightly regarded Sennacherib's words as meant to reproach the
living God, for the point of the letter was to dissuade from trust in
Him, as no more powerful than the petty deities of already conquered
cities. The prayer, therefore, pleads that God would take care of His
own honour, and by delivering Jerusalem, show His sole sovereignty. It
is a high and wonderful level for faith to reach, when it regards
personal deliverance mainly in its aspect as vindicating God and
warranting faith. We may too easily conclude that God's honour is
involved in our deliverance, and it is well to be on our guard against
that.

But it is possible to die to self so fully as to feel that our cause is
His, because His is so entirely ours; and then we may come to that
heroic faith which seeks even personal good more for God's sake than
for our own. It was noble that this man should have no word to say
about self but 'Save us, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know
that Thou art God alone.' Like him, we may each feel that our defence
is more God's affair than ours, in proportion as we feel we are His
rather than our own. That siege of Jerusalem was indeed as a duel
between faith and unbelief on the one hand, and between Jehovah and the
gods who were 'no gods' on the other. Sennacherib's letter was a
defiant challenge to Jehovah to do His best for this people, and when
faith repeated in prayer the insolence of unbelief only one result was
possible. It came.

IV. Note the deliverance of faith. Isaiah's grand prophecy tempts us to
linger over its many beauties and magnificent roll of triumphant scorn,
but it falls outside our purpose. As for the catastrophe, it should be
noted that its place and time are not definitely stated, and that
probably the notion that the Assyrian army was annihilated before
Jerusalem is a mistake. Sennacherib and his troops were at Libnah, on
their way to meet the Egyptian forces. If there were any of them before
Jerusalem, they would at most be a small detachment, sufficient to
invest it. Probably the course of events was that, at some time not
specified, soon after the dismissal of the messengers who brought the
letter, the awful destruction fell, and that, when the news of the
disaster reached the detachment at Jerusalem, as the psalm which throbs
with the echoes of the triumph says, 'They were troubled, and hasted
away.'

How complete was the crushing blow the lame record of this campaign in
the inscriptions shows, in which the failure of the attempt to capture
the city is covered up by vapouring about tribute and the like. If it
had not failed, however, the success would certainly have been told, as
all similar cases are told, with abundant boasting. The other fact is
also to be remembered, that Sennacherib tried no more conclusions with
Jerusalem and Jehovah, and though he lived for some twenty years
afterwards, never again ventured on to the soil where that mighty God
fought for His people.

The appended notice of Sennacherib's death has been added by some
narrator, since it probably occurred after Isaiah's martyrdom. 'All
they that take the sword shall perish with the sword.' Such a career as
his could not but give taste for violence and bloodshed, and dimmish
regard for human life. Retribution comes slowly, for twenty years
intervened between the catastrophe to the army and the murder of the
king. Its penalties increase as its fall delays; for first came the
blotting out of the army, and then, when that had no effect, at last
the sword in his own heart. 'He that being often reproved hardeneth his
neck shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy.'

But the great lesson of that death is the same as that of the other
king's deliverance. Hezekiah 'went unto the house of the Lord,' and
found Him a very present help in trouble. Sennacherib was slain in the
house of his god. The two pictures of the worshippers and their fates
are symbolic of the meaning of the whole story. Sennacherib had dared
Jehovah to try His strength against him and his deities. The challenge
was accepted, and that bloody corpse before the idol that could not
help preaches a ghastly sermon on the text, 'They that make them are
like unto them; so is every one that trusteth in them. O Israel, trust
thou in the Lord: He is their help and their shield.'




WHERE TO CARRY TROUBLES

And Hezekiah received the letter from the hand of the messengers, and
read it: and Hezekiah went up unto the house of the Lord, and spread it
before the Lord.'--ISAIAH xxxvii. 14.


When Hezekiah heard the threatenings of Sennacherib's servants, he rent
his clothes and went into the house of the Lord, and sent to Isaiah
entreating his prayers. When he received the menacing letter, his faith
was greater, having been heartened by Isaiah's assurances. So he then
himself appealed to Jehovah, spreading the letter before Him, and
himself prayed God to guard His own honour, and answer the challenge
flung down by the insolent Assyrian. It is noble when faith increases
as dangers increase.

I. We have here an example of what to do with troubles and difficulties.

We are to lay them out before God, as we can do by praying about them.
Hezekiah's trouble was great. His kingdom could be crushed like an
eggshell by the grasp of Sennacherib's hand. But little troubles as
well as great ones are best dealt with by being 'spread before the
Lord.' Whatever is important enough to disturb me is important enough
for me to speak to God about it. Whether the poison inflaming our blood
be from a gnat's bite, or a cobra's sting, the best antidote is--pray
about it.

How much more real and fervid our prayers would be, if we habitually
turned all our affairs into materials for petition! That is a very
empty dispute as to whether we ought to pray for deliverance from
outward sorrows. If we are living in touch with God, we cannot but take
Him into our confidence, if we may so say, as to everything that
affects us. And we should as soon think of hiding any matter from our
dearest on earth as from our Friend in heaven. 'In _everything_, by
prayer and supplication' is the commandment, and will be the instinct
of the devout heart.

Note Hezekiah's assurance that God cares about him.

Note his clear perception that God is his only help.

Note his identification of his own deliverance with God's honour. We
cannot identify our welfare, or deliverance in small matters, with
God's fair fame, in such a fashion. But we ought to be quite sure that
He will not let us sink or perish, and will never desert us. And we can
be quite sure that, if we identify ourselves and our work with Him, He
will identify Himself with us and it. His treatment of His servants
will tell the world (and not one world only) what He is, how faithful,
how loving, how strong.

II. We have here an example of how God answers His servants' prayers.

It was 'by terrible things in righteousness' that Hezekiah's answer
came. His prayer was at one end of the chain, and at the other was a
camp full of corpses. One poor man's cry can set in motion tremendous
powers, as a low whisper can start an avalanche. That magnificent
theophany in Psalm xviii., with all its majesty and terror of flashing
lightnings and a rocking earth, was brought about by nothing more than
'In my distress I called upon the Lord,' and its purpose was nothing
more than to draw the suppliant out of many waters and deliver him from
his strong enemy.

That army swept off the earth may teach us how much God will do for a
praying child of His. His people's deliverance is cheaply purchased at
such a price. 'He reproved kings for their sake.'

One man with God beside him is stronger than all the world. As the
psalmist learned in his hour of peril, 'Thou, Lord, makest me to dwell
in safety, thou alone!'




GREAT VOICES FROM HEAVEN

'Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith your God. 2. Speak ye
comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is
accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned: for she hath received of
the Lord's hand double for all her sins. 3. The voice of him that
crieth in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight
in the desert a highway for our God. 4. Every valley shall be exalted,
and every mountain and hill shall be made low: and the crooked shall be
made straight, and the rough places plain: 5. And the glory of the Lord
shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together: for the mouth
of the Lord hath spoken it. 6. The voice said, Cry. And he said, What
shall I cry? All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as
the flower of the field: 7. The grass withereth, the flower fadeth:
because the spirit of the Lord bloweth upon it: surely the people is
grass. 8. The grass withereth, the flower fadeth: but the word of our
God shall stand for ever. 9. 0 Zion, that bringest good tidings, get
thee up into the high mountain; O Jerusalem, that bringest good
tidings, lift up thy voice with strength; lift it up, be not afraid:
say unto the cities of Judah, Behold your God! 10. Behold, the Lord God
will come with strong hand, and His arm shall rule for Him: behold, His
reward is with Him, and His work before Him.'--ISAIAH xi. 1-10.


How majestically this second part of the Book of Isaiah opens with
these mysterious voices! Other prophecies are wont to begin with
symbolic visions, but here the ear takes the place of the eye; and
instead of forms and flashing lights, which need to be translated, the
prophet hears words, the impressiveness of which is heightened by the
absence of any designation of the speakers. This much is clear, that
the first words are God's, addressed to the prophets. They are the
keynote of the whole. Israel is comforted in the assurance that her
trial is ended and her sin purged. Then there is silence, broken by a
voice to which no personality is attached, the herald and forerunner of
the coming King and God. When the echoes of it have died away, another
is heard, commanding yet another unnamed to 'cry,' and, in response to
the latter's asking what is to be the burden of his message, bidding
him peal out the frailty of man and the eternal vigour of the word of
the Lord, which assures its own fulfilment.

Then comes a longer pause. The way has been prepared, the coming God
has come; He has set up His throne in the restored Jerusalem, and His
glory is seen upon her. So there rings out from unnamed lips the
stirring command to the city, thus visited by the indwelling God, to
proclaim the glad tidings with a voice, the strength of which shall
